"This class is an invitation to explore writing for theater, film, and television by creating ten scripts over the 10-week term. Edward Albee told Andrea that a play is as long as it is. To that end, like a short story, the short form allows for the creation of numerous stories, testing of form and structure, experimentation, failure, and success. Scripts can range from 1 page to 10 pages or longer if need be. This writing workshop will be fast-paced and inquiry-driven. We will use class time to do writing exercises, ask and answer questions, discuss the craft of scriptwriting, and share and critique our own and one another’s work. Students will be expected to create ten scripts, re-draft 5 of those scripts, and select their favorite script to further refine and finalize as their final project.

Evaluation is based on the quality of written work and participation in class discussions. Work will be evaluated for quality, engagement, effectiveness, on-time delivery, and commitment to the workshop collective. Students are expected to bring in new plays each week and to contribute their best work to an end-of-class public reading.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"This course is an introduction to three dimensional design and sculpture. Through a variety of projects students will analyze and apply the classic organizing principles of three dimensional design work.  Elements of form, space, line, texture, light, color, scale and time (including sound, sensory perceptions, movement and natural processes) will be explored -- with attention paid to how a work functions, involves a viewer, activates a space, or impacts an environment, physically, psychically or socially.  Projects in the class will progress from the creation of objects, to investigations of the sensory and objective aspects of space.  Students will experiment with subtractive and constructive processes using traditional as well as contemporary materials such as found, recycled and natural objects.  A diverse range of materials and techniques will be introduced and demonstrated.  Discussion of historic and contemporary artists' work will augment the course.  Students will be evaluated based on completion of projects, participation in class discussions and individual/group critiques.  

Level: Introductory/Intermediate.  Class limit: 15.  Lab Fee $85.  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS"
"Religious experiences and concepts have been central in history. They have informed ideas of self, community and nature as well as practices of science, technology and politics. This course provides an intellectual history of the concepts of god or gods and related notions and practices. It will focus on them as they have developed in the West but will also look, briefly, for comparative purposes at India and China. It will use secondary materials like Karen Armstrong’s A History of God and Peter Adamson’s A History of Philosophy Without Any Gaps to follow threads of the story from early polytheism up through the present day. It will also focus on a series of short selected primary sources including sacred texts as well as writings by philosophers, theologians, political thinkers and mystics. Class format will be a mixture of lecture and discussion. Students will be evaluated on their participation in discussions and their ability to convey their understanding of material in short homework assignments, two problem sets and two papers analyzing the historical connections between one or more texts and their contexts.
 
Level: Intermediate. Pre-requisites: None. Class limit: 16. Lab fee: none.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS, HY"
"This winter, students will collaboratively research and build a hybrid performance installation performed for the public at the end of the term. The project will be drawn from work previously created and staged, by faculty member and artist Dru Colbert. That work was a trilogy of original performance installation events conceived of by Dru, focused on the landscape, history and folklore of Mt. Desert Island, Maine, and sited specifically in various locations on the island at different times of the year. The work explores human activity and memory associated with the surrounding landscape, and is intended to conjure ""hidden"" histories of human occupation and experience on the island that are not covered in the guidebooks or National Park brochures. The project of the monster course this winter will be to reconsider one of these works within the current historical and cultural context with new collaborators and new elements. The project will be researched, built and performed by participants in the course in collaboration with select local organizations and community members. Areas of research and documentation include: natural and historical events (through community interviews and historical record/found footage/home movies), scientific processes, things that crossover time(s), spirits emerging from the past, predictions and imaginings of the future, and entities from adjacent worlds.
 
Students selected for the course will engage collaboratively and individually in a wide range of art making activities including dramaturgical research and planning of large and small scale visual, spatial and performance elements, scriptwriting, object making, choreography, light, sound and music, ensemble/crew management, promotion, and documentation. Evaluation will be based on demonstrated engagement with all course elements and materials as well as successful navigation of and contribution to the shared production process. 

Students with visual art, craft, sewing, carpentry, construction, tech, performance art, sound and puppetry experience are especially encouraged to apply. Previous coursework in these areas is not required but will be most useful. 

To be considered for the course, students must complete the questionnaire provided via email by week 3, Fall term. Instructors may also request interviews. This large scale intensive process will result in a run of 4 site specific performances at the end of the Winter term. The course counts for 3 full credits and requires a considerable time commitment. The default grading option for this course is credit/no credit. 

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: None but visual art, craft, sewing, carpentry, construction, tech, performance art, sound and puppetry experience are especially encouraged.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: $150.  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS."
"Using Acadia National Park as a case study, this course will explore the various facets of ""the national park idea"" and what it means for Americans in terms of history and identity.  Through direct experiences in one of the ""crown jewels"" of the park system, the class will examine the historical, ecological, cultural, social, legal, economic, and spiritual context in which national parks are formed and continue to exist in the 21st century.   We will work with National Park Service professionals to look at various aspects of park management and day-to-day challenges of implementing the ""national park idea."" Through weekly field trips, journaling, service learning opportunities, and projects, we will be immersed in the management and experience of Acadia.  We will explore, through reading and writing, the broader themes of wilderness preservation, attitudes toward nature, the history of conservation, and the commodification of nature.  This experiential class is specifically geared toward first-year students and they will be given preference for enrollment. Assignments will include journal writing, short exercises, a group project/service learning opportunity, short presentations, and papers. 
 
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: none. Class limit: 20. Lab fee: $40. Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"In ""Beginning to End Hunger,"" M. Jahi Chappell quotes the Brazilian sociologist Herbert Jose ""Betinho"" de Souza, who said ""I'm not some stupid optimist. I'm an active optimist."" Chappell goes on to argue that active optimism—the notion that problems can be solved if we act on them with critical knowledge—is precisely what is needed to end hunger. This course will embrace the practice of active optimism by engaging students in place-based efforts to address food systems issues at COA. In this advanced course, students will form project teams and work collaboratively to build on on-going campus food systems initiatives. During week one of the course, students will select project teams and work with the instructor to develop a reading list and schedule tailored to the groups' needs. Thereafter, class time will be dedicated to discussing readings, developing and peer-reviewing research plans and materials, presenting progress-reports, collecting and analyzing data, and facilitating community input and outreach activities. Depending on their project, students may focus more or less on data collection and analysis, policy development, or program implementation. Students will be evaluated based on their participation (including self-directedness and professionalism), the quality of the processes and outputs of their projects, and their ability to work collaboratively with classmates and the campus-community (in particular, community-partners including COA’s dining managers, farm managers, Food Systems Working Group, and the Cabinet).
 
Level: Advanced.  Prerequisites: Two previous courses in food systems, and permission of instructor.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: none.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"This course is an intermediate/advanced level scene study course. Each iteration of the course examines the works of either a single playwright or a single play. The writer and the work are researched through performance practice. The class examines the text(s) dramaturgically while developing strategies for performing the work effectively for contemporary audiences. The vast majority of our class time will be spent learning, staging and presenting key monologues and scenes from the play(s) for critique and continued revision. Students will also gain a clear understanding of the historical and political context in which the work was written and together determine if or how it has maintained contemporary relevance. Besides reading the play(s) themselves and screening examples of the work in production, students will likely read related theory, criticism, interviews, essays and articles by or about the playwright. Evaluation is based on participation in class activities, readings and discussion, successful completion of all performance projects including productive rehearsal time both alone and in groups, a portfolio of written responses and demonstrated engagement with a shared class blog.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: Prereqs (if any) will be determined in connection to the specific subject matter. This info will be shared with students via email before the registration period. Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $40.  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS"
"This course will look closely at a small selection of plays adapted from other works. At its core this is a dramaturgical practice and methods course. Students will investigate impulses and processes for re-envisioning, re-working, re-purposing another’s text. We will read and discuss some theories of adaptation (mostly, but not exclusively, as they pertain to collaborative art making practices) as well as a sampling of contemporary criticism. A central goal of the course will be to better understand how the term adaptation is understood across disciplines and to fuel a complex discussion about what might make a theatrical adaptation feel relevant or effective in a given context. We will also look closely at moments in history that have instigated a serious 'looking back', spurring a collective creative impulse to re-visit and re-invent previously established works. One could argue that we are currently living in such a cultural moment. Please note: this course requires a significant reading load. Students will be required to close read/view all adapted texts, all original source materials and a variety of supporting texts (as described above). We will also draw from film, visual art and music for this study. Evaluation will be based on a sequence of short practical assignments and demonstrated engagement with the course materials through live discussion and a shared class blog.

Level: Advanced.  Prerequisites: Permission of instructor required; previous coursework in literature, creative writing, art history and/or theatre studies is strongly advised.  Class limit: 10.  Lab fee: $100.  Meets the following degree requirements: AD"
"This course focuses on the human brain, including its structural and functional aspects, as it relates to addiction. Addiction comes in many forms – drugs, sex, food, video games, and virtually anything to which we become “addicted.” We will explore the neurobiological mechanisms of addiction and how they relate to human behavior. Basic structures and functions of the brain, neurons, neural networks, and neurotransmitters will be covered in addition to theories of learning and motivation that relate to addiction. Readings will include original research articles, media coverage on addiction, and textbook-style chapters with self-paced quizzes on the basic psychological and neuropsychological concepts covered throughout the term. 
Students will be evaluated based on attendance, in-class participation, reading responses, short quizzes, and a final research paper that examines one type of addiction and its treatment approaches in downeast Maine.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 14.  Lab fee: $20.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS."
"This course has two goals:  1) to aid the student in developing and refining a style and 2) to make the student cognizant of the interaction between style, content, and audience.  To achieve these goals, students write several short papers or one or two longer ones, meet regularly with the instructor to go over these, edit and discuss the exercises in Style:  Ten Lessons in Clarity and Grace by Joseph Williams, and participate in review sessions. 

Level:  Advanced.  Prerequisites:  Signature of instructor.  Offered every winter.  Class limit: 12. Lab fee: none. Meets the following degree requirements: W."
"In this advanced workshop students create an original documentary project in video (or photography, sound, or web-based formats with permission of instructor). Creative originality will be stressed with exercises focused on bringing students through the process of creating an independent documentary from grant writing to distribution. Weekly screenings of work by contemporary and vanguard filmmakers will stress artistic experimentation as well as encourage various ways of seeing and listening. Students will refine skills in research, fieldwork, collaboration, interviewing, recording, editing, and production management. Evaluation will be based on the creation of one documentary piece completed over the term, with supporting production assignments. The class culminates with a public screening of students’ work.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: Previous coursework with the instructor or other filmmaking, photography, and audio courses at the college level. Class limit: 10. Lab fee: $50. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"This course is designed to provide an overview of the use of international law in solving transnational environmental problems and shaping international behavior.  We examine, as background, the nature and limitations of international law as a force for change. The course will then explore customary law, the relationship between soft and hard law, enforcement of international law, implementation mechanisms, and the effectiveness of multilateral environmental agreements. Special attention is given to existing international environmental law frameworks addressing climate change, Arctic and Antarctic development, ozone depletion, biological diversity, forest loss, export of toxic chemicals, and the host of issues raised by the 1992 United Nations Conference on the Environment and Development and subsequent environmental fora.  Students will also consider the interface between international environmental law and other important international forces such as the Bretton Woods institutions, human rights frameworks, and international development entities.  Students will be evaluated on the quality of their classroom comments and several analytical problem sets given during the term.  Students will also be asked to complete a major research project examining the effectiveness of a treaty or a proposed international environmental legal arrangement.  

Level:  Advanced.  Prerequisites:  Environmental Law and Policy or Global Environmental Politics, and Signature of Instructor; Sophomore or higher college level.   Class limit: 10.  Lab fee: $10.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"This course is designed to provide students opportunities to build on their technical and conceptual skills of photography created in accordance with the creative vision of the photographer. There will be a focus on photographic image-making within a fine art context in conjunction with development of heightened awareness and concepts in relation to personal perspective. Each class will include discussion of reading assignments, in-class shooting assignments, looking at contemporary artists and their photographic practices. Art concepts, ideas, and critiques of ongoing student work will occur weekly. In addition, there will be an individual meeting with the instructor at midterm aimed to solidify each student’s work. Students will be evaluated based on the completion of a series of assignments, the development of a self-chosen body of work, participation in class discussions/critiques and class attendance.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced Prerequisites: Introduction to Photography or some photography experience/knowledge. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: $110. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"In Advanced Samba Percussion Ensemble, we will focus on developing a repertoire of percussion music based in two Brazilian music traditions: Samba Reggae from the city of Salvador de Bahia and Samba Batucada, an instrumental substyle of Samba music originating in Rio de Janeiro. This class builds on the work undertaken in Samba Percussion Ensemble by exploring additional styles, developing more complex arrangements, and building a wider repertoire. Along the way, students will cultivate skills in percussion performance, physical coordination, formal memorization, functional notation strategies, and rhythmic awareness. At the same time, we will learn about the social history of Samba music through reading, screening, listening, and discussion. These twin endeavors are mutually enriching and are designed to contribute towards a more robust and holistic model of cross-cultural musical learning.
 
This term, we will be joined on campus by guest artist Caique Vidal, a percussionist born and raised in Salvador, Bahia, for a series of workshops and a final performance at the end of the term.
 
Advances Samba Percussion Ensemble is open to students who have taken Samba Percussion Ensemble or by special permission. Please contact Jonathan if you have not taken the intro class but want to be considered for the advanced class. The first class session of the week will typically be split between rehearsal and listening/discussion/instruction. The second class session of the week will be reserved just for rehearsal. Students will be assessed based on their participation in class learning and discussion, practice outside of class time, and the completion of assignments. 

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: Samba Percussion Ensemble or permission of instructor. Class limit: 20.  Lab fee: $75.  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS."
"The course provides students a compact immersive experience in Yucatecan culture and Spanish language through a self-directed and individualized program. This course is primarily directed towards students who have previously completed the Yucatán program or are in their final year of studies and have at least an intermediate level of Spanish. Depending on the student, the activities in the class may be entirely project based or more focused on directed coursework with instructors in the Yucatán Program. Either way the students' work will take place on the Yucatán Peninsula and last four weeks.This course requires active student engagement in the preparation of the project as well as during the project. If you are interested in this course, please contact the instructor well in advance. 

Level: Advanced. Prerequisite: Permission of instructor. Class limit: 5. Lab fee: $1700. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"This course is for students who are competent in the principal grammatical forms of Spanish. In this class, students increase their mastery and automatic command of  grammar and nuances of  idiomatic usages, broaden their vocabulary in general and deepen it in targeted areas, enrich their understanding of  multiple dimensions of Hispanic  culture, and increase their ability to read, write, hear and speak in a variety of rhetorical forms and genres.  Student are evaluated based on class participation, homework and their ability to work effectively with multiple kinds of texts, interviews, conversations, formal interviews, oral presentations, writing exercises in different styles, and non-verbal communication. Typically offered in fall or winter. 

Level: Advanced. Prerequisites: Permission of instructor.  Class limit: 10. Lab fee: $20. Meets the following degree requirements: HS."
"This course is for students who are competent in the principal grammatical forms of Spanish and have completed the equivalent of Advanced Spanish I. The course is taught entirely in Spanish using immersion learning methods. It employs diverse resources such as music, food, dance, film, presentations on individual topics of interest, classroom debates, conversations, written reflections and more, with an emphasis on communication.

Students will continue to hone their ability to express themselves orally and through writing, and heighten their listening and reading comprehension in a variety of rhetorical forms and genres. They will also increase their command of the nuances of idiomatic usages, deepen their vocabulary in targeted areas and enrich their understanding of multiple dimensions of Latin American culture. Further, they will advance their skill and knowledge in specific areas of interest in Hispanic language and culture including, for instance, history, literature, anthropology, cinema, arts or sciences. Evaluation criteria include achievement of course goals as demonstrated by class participation, homework and the ability to work effectively with multiple kinds of texts, interviews, conversations, formal interviews, oral presentations, writing exercises in different styles, non-verbal communication and individual projects.

Level: Advanced.   Prerequisites: Permission of instructor, placement exam required to confirm level. Class limit: 15 Lab fee: $20. Meets the following degree requirements: HS."
"This art studio course is a continuation of the introductory course Studio Printmaking. A print mirrors the surface of its matrix and presents a reflection of the physical and/or immaterial realms of objects and ideas. Representing concepts clearly in any medium requires an artist to engage in thoughtful collaboration with materials in order to realize the potential of form as a means of expression. This advanced studio course will explore ways to address this aesthetic challenge through printmaking by experimenting with conventional and non-traditional ways of creating a range of matrices. Students will acquire skills as printmakers with an emphasis on multiple-plate, collagraph, and other advanced techniques. Students will develop a deeper understanding of the history of prints; how they have functioned to communicate, document, and transmit information through images on paper – engaging with more complex discourses of representation. Students will be evaluated on their projects, participation in critiques, level of engagement with materials, ability to work in a collaborative studio, and final project. 

Level: Advanced.  Prerequisites: Studio Printmaking and at least one drawing class; permission of instructor.  Class limit: 5.  Lab fee: $200. Meets the following degree requirements: ADS"
"This class will extend on themes and topics that were begun in Marine Mammal Biology. In addition to a core syllabus in marine mammal behavior and physiology, each student will choose a subject area of focus that they will pursue individually—such topics could include molecular science, sound ecology, communication, and applied conservation issues. Prior to the actual class, students will undertake a substantial block of primary literature core readings assigned by the instructor, in addition to other readings that specialize in their individual areas of focus. In late August, students will assemble at the Mount Desert Rock Marine Research Station and become part of the crew resident at the station. During this time they will meet on a daily basis with the instructor for regular classes; they will also conduct a research project on the island as a team. Their residency at Mount Desert Rock will be approximately two weeks. Once the students have returned to the mainland, they will continue to work on analyses of data for their project, as well as individual term papers based on their area of interest. Evaluation will be based on the team project and its presentation to a peer community, as well as a journal/annotated bibliography of their readings, and a final term paper.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced.  Prerequisites: Permission of instructor.  Class limit: 3.  Lab fee: $600.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES"
"Students will build on their previous studies in West African and Afro-Cuban percussion music to elevate their rhythmic skills and knowledge of these musical cultures. In this advanced class students will learn to utilize rhythmic notation and will focus on developing a performance for the COA community. In addition, students will create a group composition. Assessment will be based on attendance, a final test, the end of term performance and their group composition.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: World Percussion or Samba Percussion Ensemble or permission of instructor. It is beneficial but not necessary for students to have their own djembe. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: ADS."
"Cultural and linguistic diversity in the classroom is becoming increasingly prevalent around the world. In the United States, for example, approximately ten percent of all students in public schools are English learners (ELs), i.e., students who are in the process of acquiring English as an additional language. ELs enjoy valuable opportunities with their additional set of cultural and linguistic resources, but they may also face discrimination as a result of racism, linguicism, and/or xenophobia. These forms of discrimination, along with other systemic barriers, can negatively affect ELs’ academic achievement and sense of belonging in their schools and communities. This course, based on a framework of culturally and linguistically responsive pedagogy, has two overarching goals. First, it aims to equip aspiring educators with the tools to recognize and respond to bias and inequity in the education of ELs. Second, it aims to introduce these future educators to the fundamental principles and techniques for teaching and advocating for culturally and linguistically diverse students. Human ecologists planning to work as educators in the school or the communities to serve ELs and their family will find this course helpful. Students who take this course will learn through active and critical engagements with readings and audio-visual materials, whole-class and group discussions, reflective and analytical writings, lesson planning, micro-teaching, and project planning. They will be evaluated through weekly responses to course materials as well as individual and team project-based assignments, such as interviews with ELs or current EL educators, advocacy projects targeting issues affecting ELs, outreach initiatives that build partnerships and/or enhance cross-cultural understanding.

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: None."
"This survey of African American literature from its origins in the slave narrative to the present vivid prose of some of America's best writers considers the impact of slavery and race consciousness on literary form and power.  Readings include letters, essays, poems, short stories, and novels of some of the following authors:  Phillis Wheatley, Frederick Douglass, Harriet Jacobs, Pauline Hopkins, Langston Hughes, Richard Wright, Zora Neale Hurston, Gwendolyn Brooks, Ralph Ellison, Toni Morrison.  

Level: Intermediate.   Prerequisite:  A previous literature course or permission of the instructor.   Class limit: 15.  Offered every other year. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"The global demand for food and fiber will continue to increase well into the next century.  How will this food and fiber be produced?  Will production be at the cost of soil loss, water contamination, pesticide poisoning, and increasing rural poverty?  In this course, we examine the fundamental principles and practices of conventional and sustainable agriculture with a primary focus on crops.  By examining farm case studies and current research on conventional and alternative agriculture we develop a set of economic, social, and ecological criteria for a critique of current agricultural practices in the United States and that will serve as the foundation for the development and analysis of new farming systems.  Evaluations are based on two exams, class presentations, participation in a conference on potato production, and a final paper.  

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisites:  Signature of the instructor and one of the following:  Biology: Cellular Processes of Life, Plant Biology, Ecology, or Economics.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $75.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES"
"This is a course in future studies and political philosophy focusing on the nature of artificial intelligence (AI) and its implications for human ecology in the modes of thought, forms of collaborative decision-making and in the structures of institutions, societies and culture in US and around the globe in the coming decades. We will critically examine a series of prominent models for understanding different ways artificial intelligence works and is transforming our societies and landscapes. We will critically examine and experiment with some key methods in futures studies to look at possible futures, assess their attractiveness and probability, and consider what steps might be taken to promote or prevent them. Methods considered will include, for instance: variations of extrapolation techniques, futures markets, scenario building, the Delphi process of consensus and futures imaging. A weekend workshop on futures imaging will be included as part of the course. Texts will include materials from Yuval Harari’s Homo Deus, Nick Bostrom’s Superintelligence, and a wide variety of short essays and website materials.  Assignments will include short homework exercises, two problem sets, and a series of short papers building to a final project on a topic of the student’s interest. Topics could include, for example, the impact of drones and cyber warfare on the national security state system, the role of automated and/or distance learning in transforming education, the use of AI to monitor and manipulate environmental systems or transformations of health care or food systems in light of AI when combined with nanotechnology, genetic modification or big data. Student work will be evaluated on the extent to which it demonstrates the development of skills for critically understanding, assessing and appropriately using the theories and methods covered in the course both in written projects as individuals and in collaborative discussions and workshop activities.

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisites: A readiness to engage with theoretical models, methodological techniques and philosophical questions in disciplined and critical ways. Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: $35.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"This course is organized around the writings of Frantz Fanon. Fanon, an anticolonial thinker, psychiatrist, and playwright, born in French-ruled Martinique in 1925, is best known for his anticolonial writings, including Black Skin, White Masks, and The Wretched of the Earth. Fanon’s influence on postcolonial studies and anticolonial struggle is also informed by his work in psychoanalysis. Alienation and Freedom (2018), which gathers together previously unpublished writings by Fanon, including plays, accounts from his work in the Blida psychiatric clinic in Algeria, and his explicitly political writings, will serve as a central text for the course. There and elsewhere, Fanon staged philosophical, anthropological, economic and literary encounters between France and its colonies, most specifically Algeria and Martinique, and more broadly between Europe and its others, and posed questions about the effects of the structures through which colonialism functioned - questions that continue to be relevant for postcolonial conditions today. Through a consideration of Fanon’s writings and those who have engaged with them, we will examine concepts of alienation, freedom, violence and difference in terms of postcolonial conditions and contemporary questions about racism and structural inequities. Over the term, we will read excerpts from Alienation and Freedom, along with other texts by Fanon and by those who informed his thinking and by those who have been informed by it, likely including Aimé Césaire, Octave Mannoni, Steve Biko, Karl Marx, Sigmund Freud, Albert Memmi, Tsitsi Dangarembga, Stefania Pandolfo, Omnia El Shakry, Michael Taussig, Homi Bhabha, Gayatri Spivak and Ranjana Khanna. Students will be expected to complete between 35 to 55 pages of reading per class, and will be evaluated based on participation in seminar discussion, informal written responses to the readings, a mid-term paper and a final paper that engage with the class readings.

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: Prior coursework in the field and with seminar discussion-based classes. Class Limit: 12. Lab Fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"Although there are many intriguing subgenres of detective fiction, this course will focus on the evolution of the figure of the American private investigator. We will explore how the PI subgenre presents (and possibly critiques and challenges) individualism, concepts of masculinity and femininity, and, of course, the persistence of the femme fatale. By reading texts from a diverse range of authors starting from the 1840s to the present, we will take a close look at how/whether attitudes toward race, sex, gender, and class have shifted over time. Works may include Poe’s “The Purloined Letter,” Hammett’s Red Harvest, Chandler’s The Big Sleep, MacDonald’s The Way Some People Die, Paretsky’s Indemnity Only, Mosley’s Devil in a Blue Dress, Wesley’s When Death Comes Stealing, Garcia-Aguilera’s Bloody Waters, and Gran’s Claire DeWitt and the City of the Dead. Students can expect to read theory to enhance their understanding of the detective genre and attend/view weekly screenings of films such as The Thin Man and Night Moves and episodes of TV shows such as The Rockford Files, Magnum P.I., Moonlighting, and Veronica Mars.

The first seven weeks of the course will be dedicated to literary analysis. Students will produce two major papers and write weekly reading responses. There will be a strong emphasis on pre-writing, and each major paper will go through peer revision. The last three weeks will be devoted to the craft of fiction writing, and students will compose their own short pieces of detective fiction.

Evaluation will be based on a labor-based grading system indebted to the work of Asao B. Inoue. As Inoue writes, “How much labor you do is more important to your learning and growth as a reader and writer than the quality of your writing.”

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class Limit: 12. Lab Fee: None."
"The course focuses on dramatic literature connected to historically relevant political and social issues in the U.S.  Students will read plays and study a variety of artists that have used theatre as a viable force for change over the last century. Together we'll explore the mechanics and dynamics of particular performances as well as the cultural context in which these works were conceived. We will investigate significant periods in American history such as the New Deal, the House Un-American Activities Committee, the Civil Rights Movement, the emergence of the AIDS epidemic, the attack on the World Trade Center and the economic crash of 2007-08 - and we will explore the impact of these events on this particular form. Research will include Circuit Chautauqua, Pat Chappelle, Hallie Flanagan and The Federal Theatre Project, Susan Glaspell, Clifford Odetts, Arthur Miller, Lorraine Hansberry, The Living Theatre, The Open Theatre, Adrienne Kennedy, Marie Irene Fornes, The Wooster Group, Anna Deavere-Smith, Luis Valdez, Tony Kushner, Suzan-Lori Parks, Young Jean Lee, Brandon Jacob Jenkins,  The TEAM, Radiohole and more. Evaluation is based on full participation in class discussion, successful completion of all short projects and assignments and a major final project/paper. 

Level: Intermediate.  Pre-requisite: Successful completion of the writing requirement and at least one literature course.   Course limit: 11.  Lab fee: $100.  Meets the following degree requirements: AD HY"
"One day in the late spring of 1630, somewhere in the North Atlantic, John Winthrop told his Puritan congregation that “we must consider that we shall be as a city upon a hill. The eyes of all people are upon us.” And so, days before the Arbella anchored in what would become Boston Harbor and 146 years before independence had been declared, American Exceptionalism was born. Or was it? Eleven years earlier, write the authors of The 1619 Project, “a ship appeared [off] the British colony of Virginia. It carried more than 20 enslaved Africans, who were sold to the colonists. America was not yet America, but this was the moment it began [and from it] grew nearly everything that has made America truly exceptional.” This seminar will examine the complex legacy of the idea of American Exceptionalism through four defining primary documents across four centuries: “A Model of Christian Charity” (1630), “Declaration of Independence” (1776), “Gettysburg Address” (1863), and “I Have a Dream” (1963). We will also draw from recent academic and popular works by Edward Baptist, Isabel Wilkerson, Nikole Hannah-Jones, James McBride, and Clint Smith, among others, that will provide both historical and critical context to help situate these texts and make sense of what they mean for us today.  Drawing from additional accounts from various periods in US history, we will wrestle with the contrasting narratives of identity and lived experience  to learn what they can tell us about the past, present, and future of the United States, its people, and its relationship to the rest of the world. This is an introductory discussion based reading seminar. Prior coursework or knowledge of United States history is not necessary for taking the class. Students will be evaluated on their contributions to class discussions, short writing assignments, and a final project, either individual or collaborative, which we will develop during the term.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 14.  Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"An Introduction to Art Education is designed for students who are curious about translating their passion for art into a career as an art educator in K-12 settings and learning about inspiring the powerful and eloquent expression of others. This course brings the many nuanced perspectives of teaching and learning in the field of art education into focus by drawing students into the value of both reflecting on their own experiences as artists and learners, and through their investigations of questions that arise. What informs practice? What do meaningful educational outcomes look like? What perspectives of art history, curriculum design, artistic development, educational theory, pedagogy, or assessment standards align with my students' visions of the meaning and value of art education? By the end of the course, students will be able to assess the effect of a wide range of practices and the theories that empower learners to meet their goals as developing artists. Six hours of observation in a K-12 art room setting is required. 

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: $20."
"This course will focus heavily on field sampling (primarily lake sediment coring), technical field skills (canoeing, knot tying, camping) and laboratory processing of the collected samples (extraction, analysis, selection). This course will cover a variety of analytical techniques including gas chromatography mass spectrometry (analysis of biomarkers from human habitation preserved in lake sediment cores), inductively coupled plasma atomic absorption (heavy metal analysis in sediment samples), thermogravimetric analysis (to determine organic and carbonate content of soil and sediment samples) and 14C dating. For each type of analysis, students will learn the technique’s theory, followed by hands-on laboratory practice. Students will be evaluated based on participation in field sampling, lab processing, and lecture discussions, as well as through regular problem sets and a term-long writing project. Although field sampling will be a major component of the course, students do not need to have any prior experience with technical field skills; we will teach the necessary field skills as part of the course. Students will need waterproof shoes, raingear (rain pants and raincoat) and appropriate layers for (synthetic or wool) for spending prolonged periods of time outside. If students do not have their own personal gear we can provide it for them if we are informed by the start of the course. All technical equipment (canoes, lifejackets, coring equipment) will be provided.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: At least one college-level science course.  Class limit: 10.  Lab fee: $0. Meets the following degree requirements: ES, QR"
"This course reviews how simple and stereotyped actions may be built into complex behaviors and even into apparently sophisticated group interactions.  Emphasis is placed on contemporary understanding of Darwinian selection, ethology, behavioral ecology and sociobiology.  There are two classes a week.  Extensive readings are chosen from a text and articles from scientific and popular periodicals.  Evaluations are based on participation in discussions and several quizzes.  

Level: Intermediate/Advanced.  Prerequisites: Requires a previous intermediate-level course in species zoology.  Offered every other year.  Class limit: 10.  Lab fee $10.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES"
"What are our moral obligations to other animals? Should non-human animals have legal rights and moral standing? If so, on what basis? How does the moral treatment of animals change across the contexts of food, research, captivity, and the home? Historically, western philosophers construct the animal in opposition to the human. Why? What is an “animal” and why is the “human” contrasted with it? How does language shape and produce our relationships with animals? How is the animal represented and characterized, and how does this representation impact our thinking about animal ethics?

This discussion-based course explores the relationships between humans and non-human animals. Drawing on fiction, philosophy, and ethology, we will examine our beliefs and assumptions regarding animals, human-animal relations, and the ethical implications of the human-animal binary. This course will focus on a wide range of theoretical approaches, including the traditions of animal liberation and animal rights as articulated by thinkers such as Tom Regan and Peter Singer, the growing field of animal studies as represented by thinkers like Jacques Derrida, and current debates in practical ethics, such as animal experimentation, hunting, and invasive species.

Upon completion of the course, students will have refined their understanding of the concept of the animal and they will be familiar with the key legal and ethical debates regarding human-animal relationships. Course requirements include class discussions, weekly writing exercises, a midterm exam, and a final paper or project. Students should come to this class prepared to read challenging philosophical essays and to share their ideas with others.

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"This course explores  animation as a form of creative expression, experimentation and personal vision.  Various techniques, such as drawing, cut-out, painting on film, and under-the-camera collage, will be introduced.  Students will create flip-books, video pencil tests and animated films.  Students will be given exercises and assignments that guide them through processes for making art.  Various artists' animated films will be screened and discussed.  History and concepts related to animation and film will be introduced through screenings, readings and discussions.  

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisite: previous introductory art course.  Lab fee: $30.  Class Limit: 12.  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS"
"The class further develops ideas, skills, and animation projects through a mix of: in-class projects/demos/skill based activities, readings, discussions, screenings, presentations,   and individual meetings with the instructor.  Students will write a production plan that will serve as an outline of each student’s project(s) for the term. The instructor will provide useful activities, information, resources, critiques and guidance.  A schedule of presentations of student works-in-progress will be created. Readings will address ideas and theories related to animation studies and processes.  Advanced animation techniques may include camera work and sound design. Work completed over the term may be a single longer animation or a series of animated shorts depending on the student’s preference and animation goals.  However, all students will be expected to produce advanced level work and encouraged to experiment and push their work to the highest level.   Students will be evaluated on their projects, participation in critiques and discussions and overall level of engagement with the course material and class.

Level: Advanced.  Pre-requisite: Animation, signature of instructor.  Class size: 12.  Lab fee: $80.  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS"
"Most amphibians are small vertebrates that require moist microhabitats and/or unrestricted access to fresh water to sustain their populations. Despite their diminutive size, need for moisture, and cryptic habits, the 6000+ species of extant amphibians are found on all continents except Antarctica and are extremely diverse in their morphology, ecology, and behavior. Amphibian diversity peaks in tropical regions but salamanders are thought to be the numerically dominant vertebrate species in mature forest habitats of the eastern US. Because their combined numbers represent a significant amount of living biomass, amphibians have been used as crucial bio-indicators to assess the ecological health of natural communities. Worldwide declines in anuran populations are well documented, with a multitude of causes for these declines being implicated depending on species and locale.

Applied Amphibian Biology is a field- and discussion-based course that engages students in a series of on-going projects which address the intersection of amphibian biology and conservation biology on Mount Desert Island. Students will collect original data in the field, analyze and interpret trends in the data, and write up their findings for future dissemination at local and/or regional conferences. Readings will be drawn from book chapters, the primary literature, and web sources that archive PDF documents germane to this course. The sequence and tempo of work in this course are heavily weather dependent, requiring students to conduct research at night, often with little notice beforehand. Students will be evaluated on their level of meaningful engagement in all aspects of original research and their participation in class discussions. 

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: Permission of Instructor. Class limit: 6. Lab fee: $50. Meets the following degree requirements: *ES*."
"There isn’t really much consensus on what Data Science actually is. Some argue that it’s a nascent interdisciplinary field that encompasses elements of computer science, applied statistics, and data visualization. Others insist that it’s a “fourth paradigm” of science: empirical, theoretical, computational, and now “data-driven”. Regardless of what it is, what may be most important is to understand what Data Science does and what you can learn to do with it!

This course will be both a broad overview of how Data Science is done in the “real world” with a specific focus on learning applications of practical Data Science skills. This would be a great class for those interested in an introductory exploration of Data Science as a primary area of focus as well as those looking to add a degree of technical expertise with data to pre-existing work and interests. We’ll be focusing on four major areas of application: (1) properly building data-driven questions and hypotheses; (2) obtaining, organizing, and transforming data; (3) exploratory data analysis and pattern recognition; and, as time permits, (4) data visualization and communication. Leaving this class,  students will be able to immediately apply these concepts to a broad array of interests. For example: students should be able to generate hypotheses from disparate data sources (such as minutes from ACM), obtain and transform data from websites (like accessing the U.S. Census Bureau API), explore and analyze data to discover patterns (such as through spatial biological data sets), and visualize such data for easy communication to peers and laypersons. 

Classes will be taught as a mix of live coding exercises, lectures, and group discussions. No prior programming experience is required - we’re going to be learning to use the R programming language in this course! - but a familiarity with computers and data will be helpful. Students will need to use either their personal laptop or a COA loaner laptop for class and programming exercises. Evaluation will be through class participation and discussion, several data investigation exercises, and a final project. The data investigations will take the form of written analyses of several well-known data sets as well as investigations of synthetic ones created specifically for the course. The final project will take the form of an oral presentation of an analysis. This can be either done in a group or as an individual and may be of any topic of sufficient interest to the student(s) involved.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: none. Class limit: 15. Lab fee: none."
"Applied Data Science II is a continuation of the themes and topics covered in Applied Data Science I. Whereas Applied Data Science I focused on data-cleaning, organization, and visualization, Applied Data Science II will be focused on building quantitative models from data and using those models for predictive purposes. This would be a great class for those interested in a deeper, more focused exploration of modeling within data science and how those skills can be applied across a wide variety of fields. We’ll focus on three major areas of application: (1) practical, field-invariant skills for building complex models from data; (2) understanding, designing, and building predictive models (as opposed to other types such as inferential); and (3) understanding, designing, and building models that rely on various types of statistical learning (also known as “machine learning”) to produce results. Leaving this class, students will be able to immediately apply these modeling skills to a broad array of interests and topic areas. For example: students should have the skills necessary to build predictive models for population sizes in ecological settings based upon field data, or students should be able to build a machine-learning based classification model for whether or not a given student will attend ACM in a given week. We will also take special note to cover areas of ethical concern that arise when using predictive and machine learning models.  Classes will be taught as a mix of live coding exercises, lectures, and group discussions. Prior familiarity with the R programming language and statistics - such as building linear models and hypothesis testing - are required. Students will need to use either their personal laptop or a COA loaner laptop for class and programming exercises. Evaluation will be through class participation and discussion, several data modeling exercises, and a final project. The data modeling exercises will take the form of written analyses of several well-known data sets as well as investigations of synthetic ones created specifically for the course. The final project will take the form of an oral presentation of an analysis. This can be either done in a group or as an individual and may be of any topic of sufficient interest to the student(s) involved.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced.  Prerequisites: Previous coursework in statistics and R.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: QR"
"Applied Music Lessons are an opportunity for students to work one-on-one with an instrumental or vocal teacher to develop their musical skills. This experience is designed for students with some prior knowledge and experience with their instrument (including voice), and will focus on developing intermediate and advanced skills in musical performance, composition, improvisation, etc. Application for Applied Music Lessons will be solicited in week 3 or 4 of the term prior, and students who are approved for an AML will be matched with an instructor prior to the registration window.  The AML will consist of a weekly 60-minute meeting (or bi-weekly 30-minute meetings) between the student and instructor. In addition, the AML will require independent practice and study time on the part of the student, totaling 15 academically engaged hours per week (150 hours over the 10-week term). 

The AML will consist of a formal structure, resulting in a public presentation, a learning portfolio, and a learning reflection written at the end of the term.

1. The learning plan will be written by the student at the beginning of the term, to be agreed upon by the student and instructor during the first week of lessons (the learning plan may need to be revised by the student). The learning plan will be added to the student’s learning portfolio.

2. The student will keep a practice log documenting practice hours during the term. A practice log template will be created in the student’s learning portfolio and the logs will be available for the instructor to review.

3. The student will make related independent inquiry into topics such the history and development of their chosen instrument, contemporary practice and artists, etc. (to be detailed in the learning plan). The student will update the instructor on these efforts over the course of the term.

4. The student will create a project or presentation reflecting their learning towards the end of the term. This could include a performance/recital, a community presentation on a related topic, a recording, hosting a music-focused event, etc. At the conclusion of their presentation, the student will write a summary of their project or presentation and submit it to their learning portfolio. 

5. The student will write a comprehensive learning reflection at the end of the term. The learning reflection should articulate how the student worked over the course of ten weeks to meet the learning goals outlined in their learning plan. They should focus on metacognitive learning as well as the nuts and bolts of their performance practice (ie. What did they learn about themselves as a learner? What did they find most helpful to motivate them? How did they respond to the one-on-one pedagogical format? What are future avenues for their continued study?). This learning reflection will be sent to the instructor by Friday of Week 10 (cc’d also to the supervising music faculty member and the Registrar). The learning reflection will be included along with a narrative evaluation written by the instructor in the student’s transcript.

Applied Music Lessons will be credit/no credit by default. Students will be evaluated by their instructor based on completing the components outlined above, their commitment to regular practice (as documented in their practice logs), and the quality of their work over the term. 

Level: Variable, Introductory through Advanced. Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 11. Lab Fee: $140. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"In this design studio students are introduced to the field of architectural design and the design process.  We examine various aspects of this functional art including scale, texture, volume, void, light, rhythm, and form.  Basic principals of architectural structures and a brief historical overview are presented.  Students attempt to apply these principals in solving practical problems.  They are expected to develop basic architectural drafting skills to represent three dimensional space in two dimensions.  The course includes model building skills and an actual design project.

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisites:  Recommended Introduction to Arts and Design and/or Two-Dimensional Design.  Offered every other year.  Class limit: 11.  Lab fee: $25.  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS"
"Architecture, as an artistic pursuit within the context of art history and theory, has occupied a unique niche between the cultural, societal, and ecological context driving our practical and physical reality. As they grapple with these factors, the dominant modes of theory within the discipline have shifted over time, constantly changing architectural canon, style, form, and tectonics in response. The past decade has seen significant advances in technology and practices of sustainability directly affecting architectural practice. We are now faced with ecological and socioeconomic crises that incremental improvements to the built environments and ecologies cannot address. This course seeks to reestablish a basis of architectural design approach that synthesizes these challenges. Through hands-on studio design problems, case-study presentations of precedent material, readings in art and architectural literature and theory, and site visits to realized architectural projects, this course will provide a general introduction to the practice of architectural design viewed through the lens of historic artistic response to societal, ecological, and cultural needs. Students will develop a base understanding of the discipline, while being introduced to architectural representation techniques and the tools used for architectural design and to assess building performance. In doing so, we will center our work around four key design factors actively changing the built environment and practice: Context, Function, Performance, and Identity. Students will be evaluated based on class participation, timely submission of accomplished projects, and their artist presentation.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: $100."
"Following the founding of the Black Lives Matter movement in 2013, many colleges have seen an increase of student protests to address racial injustice and anti-Blackness at their institutions. Student protests have also extended outside of race to cover topics such as gender exclusion and transphobia, sexual violence and harrassment, student labor and wage exploitation, lack of institutional resources, access, representation and more. Student activism can be seen used as a response to specific institutional acts of discrimination and bias while other movements are being built based around national and global events (i.e. Black Lives Matter, #FreePalestine, DACA, etc.). Though we have seen growth of student unrest on college campuses, student activism is actually not new and holds a long, historical legacy in higher education.  

This course will provide an overview of how activism and higher education function together and how they are dependent on one another to operate. Additionally, we will examine the ways student activism has played an integral role in shaping the foundations and progression of higher education and academia. We will review the historical context and importance of student activism on college campuses and the impact of current events and intersectional dynamics. We will analyze the influence of student activism on student learning and retention, the differences in efficacy between online and offline activism, and will provide practical skill-building and praxis towards creating change in higher education and beyond. 

Students will be evaluated based on attendance, in-class participation and discussion, short topical research assignments, and a final project. This class will be hosted virtually with (2) in-person sessions (dates to be announced). This will be a hybrid course offered between Sterling College and College of the Atlantic.

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 8.  Lab fee: None."
"This course will take an in depth look at the art and science of fermented and cultured foods.  The first half of the class will focus on the microbiology of fermentation with a specific focus on products derived from milk and soybeans.  Each week there will be a laboratory portion in which students will explore how the basic fermentation processes and products change with different milk and soy qualities.  These small-scale experiences and experiments will be complemented with field trips to commercial enterprises in Maine and Massachusetts.  In the second half of the term students will explore the differences in flat, yeast, and sourdough breads.  Final projects will focus on a foodway of choice and will culminate in presentations that explore the historical and cultural context in which these different cultured foods were developed and how these microbial-mediated processes enhance preservation, nutritional and economic value, and taste.  Evaluations will be based on class participation, short quizzes, a lab report, journal, and a final project.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: Permission of instructor. Class limit: 12. Lab Fee: $75 (to cover use of the community kitchen, one two-day field trip to Massachusetts, to visit commercial soy product companies and supplies.)  Meets the following degree requirements: ES"
"Puppetry is the art of designing, constructing, and operating puppets, usually for an audience.  A puppet is an articulated figure controlled by external means.  Puppets have been used for entertainment, education, therapy, spectacles and social/political demonstration.  This course will explore both the construction and use of puppets, investigate the theory, history and practice of puppetry, and seek out the role and potential of puppets.  Various types of puppets will be made, including hand puppets, rod puppets, shadow puppets, and large scale puppets.  Students, individually and in collaboration, will create both original and adapted scripts and scenarios for their puppets, exploring relationships between text, story, character and movement of the puppet.  In addition to live work, students may choose to develop puppets for use within film, video or multimedia projects. The course will include readings on puppetry, screenings, presentations, demonstrations, and group discussions.  Students will be evaluated on 1) participation in class discussions and exercises, 2) quality and effort demonstrated through projects/presentations  and, 3) understanding and study of readings and screenings as demonstrated in discussions and projects.

Level: Intermediate.  Recommended pre-requisite: at least one of the following:  Intro to Art and Design, 2-D Design Studio, 3-D Design, Performance Art or The Sculptural Object in Performance.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee $60.  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS"
"The artworks of Pablo Picasso and Hannah Höch; both the well-known and lesser-known artist made paintings and sculptures that facilitate our understanding of how people experienced the twentieth century. Cubism, Surrealism, Expressionism, Constructivism, Arte Povera, Social Realism, among others — these artist movements were initiated through group declarations of common aesthetic purpose. Variance within artist conventions and procedures accelerated during moments of unrest and social progression thus providing a range of counter-narratives to canonical histories of the period. The last quarter of the twentieth century was one in which new discourses informed creative production and art mono-cultures gave way to intersectional experience. Theories advanced by Edward Said, Frantz Fanon, Linda Nochlin, Griselda Pollock, and Judith Butler offered new networks with which to understand how art operates as both a reflection and critique of culture. This art history survey looks at how different artists engaged with theories of the unconscious, radical political programs, social upheaval, gender politics, and scientific advances; and, how diverse receptions of human experience were expressed through artistic production. Anxiety, joy, curiosity, and activist predilection combine to formulate a rich amalgam of fresh and challenging visions of the world. Students will be evaluated based on class participation, reading notes, a descriptive analysis, and final essay.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: none. Lab fee: $50. Class Limit: 18.  Meets the following degree requirements: AD, HY"
"This will be a ""soup to nuts"" course in audio journalism geared towards the beginner. In this class we will detail: how to record and edit audio; interviewing techniques; writing for broadcast; how to voice a script—all leading to the creation of an NPR style piece. This is very much a journalism class. Through a series of ever more challenging assignments – both individual and with a partner; in class and out – students will not only acquire the expertise to produce a compelling radio piece, but come to understand the ethics of audio journalism. The format for the course will be a hands-on workshop with a heavy workload of reporting assignments that we will critique together in review sessions. A significant amount of a student's  time outside of class will be dedicated to reporting stories, editing audio and writing scripts followed by individual edit sessions with the instructor. We will also be hearing from a number of noted journalists who will Zoom into the class on a broad range of topics. Students will be evaluated on their timely completion of assignments, overall improvement, their constructive engagement with group critique sessions and Zoom guest speakers, and their follow-up on edit suggestions from the instructor. This class is open to all students interested in journalism and audio production. There are no prerequisites, though prior experience in journalism, narrative writing or audio recording and production is helpful. 

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 10. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"Producers and engineers paint an aural picture of the work their clients wish to share with the world. This introductory course focuses on the techniques of producers as well as the engineering equipment used to create recordings for musicians. Through recording, editing, and mastering audio, students will learn to create and record music and will better understand the history of the recording and production process.

Topics that will be covered include digital and analog audio equipment, transducers, condenser and dynamic microphones, microphone placement, signal processing, ProTools software, mixing, effects processing, and interacting with clients.  An introduction to live sound reinforcement will give context to the ProTools software. Weekend sessions will provide hands-on experience recording demos for local musicians while weekly listening sessions and film screenings will highlight some recording techniques used by producers and engineers over the past sixty years. Students will be evaluated on their participation during recording sessions, their input during weekly listening sessions and screenings, and their final projects.

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: Permission of instructor; no experience playing music or recording audio is needed.  Class limit: 8.  Lab fee:  $50. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"In 1979, the music producer Brian Eno argued that the recording studio is a “compositional tool,” upending the idea that the recording studio exists to document pre-existing musical compositions. His assertion came on the back of pivotal albums such as The Beatles’ “Revolver” and The Beach Boys’ “Pet Sounds” (1966), which demonstrated the creative possibilities of composing in the studio. We might call this type of approach to music composition “playing the studio.” In this course, students learn how music production makes use of editing, mixing, and effect processing to maximize its impact. Through readings, film screenings, and audio listening sessions, students learn about past and present studio techniques and use these techniques during audio projects and exercises. Students learn to use virtual instruments, effect processors, microphones, and COA’s recording studio to strengthen their technical audio recording, editing, and mixing skills. Students will be evaluated based on their participation in class discussions, their fluency in the use of recording equipment and software, the process they use to approach each assignment, and the completion of assigned projects. No prerequisites or sound/music experience is required.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 10. Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS."
"This is an advanced course which explores in depth the works of three major writers of the Victorian period:  Jane Austen, Charlotte Bronte, and George Eliot.  The set-up of the syllabus, group meetings, and individual projects require that participants talk about connective factors between texts and the development of women writers' voices and narrative structures during this period.  Emphasis will also be placed on the construction of the heroine, the use and manipulation of the marriage plot, developments in linguistic and narrative practice, and developments in each author's work- from the juvenilia to the later fiction.  Historical perspectives, gender roles, and theoretical approaches will all be taken into consideration as we analyze novels such as:  Lady Susan, Northanger Abbey, Persuasion  (Austen); The Professor, Villette, and Shirley (Bronte); and The Mill on the Floss and Middlemarch (Eliot).  Rather than prepare papers and exams, participants will prepare and ask questions of each other, develop response papers and passage analyses, and carry out a sustained independent project to be presented to the group.  The outside project will involve additional research into one of the major authors, to include both the reading of another novel, biographical information, and critical analyses.  Projects will give participants the opportunity to explore a particular author, question, or form in depth.  The reading load for this tutorial is very heavy.  Evaluation will focus on preparation, participation, insight, critical thinking, and the outside project, which will be be presented orally and developed in an analytic fashion to be determined by the class.  

Level: Advanced.  Prerequisites: none. Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: none.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"This course draws on multiple disciplines and interdisciplinary fields (anthropology, literature, philosophy, psychoanalysis, history, postcolonial and feminist studies) to explore questions about authoritarian and anti-authoritarian contexts and practices. Authoritarianism, broadly defined, is characterized by centralized power, repression of dissent, and pressure to obey authority. Dictatorship, totalitarianism, and fascism all name forms of authoritarian regimes. It can be easy to recognize authoritarianism when it has become established in such forms. But what does it look, feel and sound like in terms of how it can infiltrate our daily systems? In this class, we will consider how authoritarianism can take hold through looking at dynamics of power in the relations, discourses and structures that make up everyday sites such as the home, family, the school, places of worship, and the workplace. On the flip side, we will also consider examples of collaboration in contexts of conflict and disagreement. What does working (and learning, teaching, and living) together in contexts of conflict, and with multiple forms of difference and disagreement, involve? The course will include attention to the significance of the nation-state as a form of political organization that dominates the globe today. We will also consider examples of social and political movements that have emerged in response to state repression in the 20th and 21st centuries in different parts of the world, as well as contemporary discourses about racism and anti-racism, sexual violence, war, capitalism and economic power, and disagreement and conflict.

Some of the questions we will examine over the term include: How do we understand relations between truth and power (and how are these terms defined)? How do we know what we think we know (epistemology)? What is structural power? What is the significance of relations between individual and group for how we respond to tensions between “individual freedom” and “collective or community wellbeing”? What is the significance of private/public distinctions for politics? Course materials will likely include work by Louis Althusser, Nur Amali Ibrahim, Benedict Anderson, Hannah Arendt, Judith Butler, Jacques Derrida, Frantz Fanon, Michel Foucault, Sigmund Freud, Verónica Gago, Adolf Hitler, William Mazzarella, George Orwell, Edward Said, Carl Schmitt, Timothy Snyder, Gayatri Spivak and Luisa Valenzuela, among others. We will also draw on contemporary news, social media and film. Students will be evaluated based on small group projects, weekly reading responses, and a mid-term paper.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 15. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: HS."
"This group study is focused on traditional gourd banjo making techniques and a broader ethnomusicological study of the banjo. We will each craft gourd-style banjos from tree to the fretless neck, gourd to pot, hide to head. Along with the hands-on making of these instruments, we will dive into the history and culture of banjo from Africa to Appalachia. In order to understand our sense of self and of place within the realm of music, we plan to deepen our curiosities of banjo and folk music through hands-on craftpersonship, history, and reflection on how the banjo has shaped our lives as aspiring folk musicians today. Through the creation of each of our own banjo, we will connect music and our working hands to a physical product of our passions. Through extensive weekly journaling, discussions, song sharings, and small presentations, we will work to understand where this instrument comes from, its structural complexity, and its relationship to ourselves. Participants will be evaluated on weekly participation in readings and occasional films, reflecting and documenting the process of the build in banjo journals, as well as completing the finalized product, and presenting our work to the community."
"In the last decade the plight of wild and domesticated bees has pervaded the media and public discourse, yet bees remain largely misunderstood in our society. This course examines the interconnected relationship between humans and bees and asks what bees can teach us about ourselves and our food systems. Through readings, fieldtrips, and guest lectures, students will examine the social, economic, and political dimensions of human-bee interactions, investigating topics such as: historical and contemporary beekeeping practices; the political economy of honey; the role of pollination in agriculture and agroecosystems; domestication and human-animal relationships; biodiversity loss in agricultural systems; pollinator conservation and policy; and cooperation and decision-making in human and bee societies. A truly human-ecological course, Bees & Society integrates the humanities, natural sciences, and social sciences to examine the applied problem of protecting pollinators in a time of abrupt environmental change. Students will be evaluated based on: (1) participation in class discussions, fieldwork, and field trips; (2) a series of short reflection papers; and (3) a final class project. For their final project, students will develop two native bee conservation workshops—one for elementary school students and one for farmers and gardeners—and host the workshops at COA’s farms.

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 14.  Lab fee: $60.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"In this introductory level course, we’ll work to develop a movement practice that centers both self care and togetherness. This class will draw on a variety of contemporary practitioners and methods, relying on somatosensory feedback to access availability, spaciousness, presence and pleasure both individually and collectively. Students will investigate basic patterns of choreography, experimenting with principles of velocity and momentum and exploring personal and shared movement impulses. Assigned readings, screenings, and writing assignments will complement and support our physical practice. Students will be evaluated based on attendance, successful completion of assigned work, depth of engagement during class and with course materials, and the expansion of their individual movement capacities. All class meetings will take place in-person and on campus. Participants of diverse abilities, needs, and backgrounds are encouraged to enroll. Dance experience is welcomed, but not necessary.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: none. Class limit: 11. Lab fee: $30. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"This course is for students who have had no contact with Latin American culture, do not possess basic Spanish language structures and expressions, and have no Spanish vocabulary. The emphasis is on development of the basic skills required in any language - listening, speaking, writing, and reading comprehension. Objective: Students will be able to express themselves orally and through writing, using vocabulary and simple construction of Spanish in the indicative tense. This includes present tense study, vocabulary, numbers, proper nouns, salutations and  presentations, present perfect tense, action verbs, the usage of ""to be"" and ""is"", future tense, vocabulary, and some usage of ""for"". Evaluation Criteria:  two Compositions, two auditory tests, two writing tests covering grammar, two oral tests, assignments/ homework, class participation.

Level:  Introductory.  Offered every fall.  Class limit: 10.  Lab fee: $20. Meets the following degree requirements: HS."
"This course is for students who have some acquaintance with general ideas, basic expressions, and vocabulary of the Spanish language but lack grammatical structures and development of the basic language abilities of speaking, writing, and listening comprehension skills. Objective: Students will express themselves orally and through writing, using vocabulary and simple construction of Spanish in the indicative tense. It includes present tense study, vocabulary, numbers, proper nouns, salutations and  presentations, present perfect tense, action verbs, the use of ""to be"" and ""is"", future tense, vocabulary, and some use of ""for"". Evaluation Criteria:  two Compositions, two auditory tests, two writing tests covering grammar, two oral tests, assignments/ homework, class participation.

Level:  Introductory.  Offered every fall.  Class limit: 10.  Lab fee: $20. Meets the following degree requirements: HS."
"This course is intended for students with a basic knowledge of grammar, using common vocabulary that is needed for every day situations. Objective: The students will be able to express themselves orally and through writing using subject-verb agreement, basic form in the indicative tense, and an introduction to the imperative moods. It includes a review of the present and future tenses, study of the imperfect tense, action verbs, direct object, proper nouns, the indicative tense, the use of the ""to be"" and ""is"" verbs, and an introduction to prepositions. Evaluation Criteria: two Compositions, two auditory tests, two writing tests covering grammar, two oral tests, assignments/ homework, class participation.

Level: Introductory.  Offered every fall.  Class limit: 10.  Lab fee: $20. Meets the following degree requirements: HS."
"Learning to speak is one of the most remarkable feats of early childhood. Speaking and becoming literate in multiple languages is even more amazing. This course will examine how children accomplish this task and the steps they go through in becoming (bi)lingual and (bi)literate in two or more languages. We will discuss both “typical” and atypical development in the learning of multiple languages, and media and educational efforts to improve children’s language and literacy development. Importantly, we will also consider how “English only” policies have affected indigenous, immigrant, and minority communities, and how language revitalization practices are attempting to reinstitute bi/multilingual education.
Topics include both “myths” and realities of bi- and multilingualism around the world. It will include how children come to learn the first and second languages, including phonological, lexical, and grammatical development. It will also consider differences in “acquired” bilingualism versus second-language learning through instruction, relations between spoken and written language development, language disorders, efforts to improve language development and second-language learning, and relations between language and thought. It will consider how policies and practices in creating bi- and multilingual citizens vary across the world, and with different languages as L1 and L2, and the implications for language use in these regions. The course is a lecture and discussion format with written responses, opportunities to lead discussions, and assignments throughout the semester. We will also observe how multiple languages are used in daily lives and engage in conversations with researchers and language instructors who visit our class either “virtually” or in person. It should be of interest for students interested in developmental psychology, linguistics, education, and language learning in general.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 14. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: HS."
"This course explores the fundamentals of biochemistry.  Emphasis will be placed on the flow and regulation of genetic information from DNA to RNA to protein, protein composition, structure and function, enzyme kinetics, metabolic pathways, and sensory systems.  The integration of these key concepts will be explored through the lens of drugs:  mechanism of action, metabolism in the body, and manipulation of protein and pathway function.  This course should be especially useful to students with an interest in medicine, nutrition, physiology, toxicology, genetics, and pharmacology.  This class meets for three hours of lecture per week; some sessions will include laboratory demonstrations and/or experiments. Evaluations are based on class preparation and participation, mid-term exam, and final paper.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced.  Prerequisites: At least one term of organic chemistry and genetics is preferred.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: none."
"Photography is one of the primary means through which scientific observation and research is conducted and presented to the public.  But the most provocative images of the natural world don't just happen; they are made by individuals skilled in both photography and the life sciences.  In this course, students will develop technical, observational, and aesthetic skills to extract relevant information from the natural world and organisms collected from nature. Through acquired skills, students will be expected to conceive methods to document the biological world and communicate concepts using strong visual imagery.  Photographic techniques and historical examples will be learned and applied.   Students will be evaluated based on their successful completion of a series of project-based assignments, participation in critiques, and their ability to effectively convey biological principles through photography.  
  
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites:  Permission of instructor. Students will be expected to provide their own camera for use in the course; a digital camera with interchangeable lenses is recommended.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $110."
"This course introduces students to the molecular and cellular processes that are essential for life.  We will initially cover some basic chemistry to develop a common language for discussing the complex molecular events that are the basis of the structure and function of cells.  This class will explore cellular processes involved in metabolism, communication, growth, and reproduction.  There is a strong emphasis on the understanding the genetic basis of these processes as well as how these processes are controlled, and we will delve into the structure and function of the DNA molecule in some detail.  We will examine how our understanding of genetic processes and genome sequencing has led to applications in research, medicine, agriculture, and industry, with time also devoted to discussion of the social and ethical consequences attached to these technological innovations.  Students will be evaluated on participation, performance on problem sets and quizzes throughout the term, and a final oral presentation.  

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: none. Class limit: 16. Lab fee: $25. Meets the following degree requirements: ES"
"This is one half of a 20-week, two-term introductory course in biology, providing an overview of the discipline and prerequisite for many intermediate and advanced biology courses. The course will emphasize biological structures at the level of whole organisms and organs and their role in the survival and reproduction of individuals and the evolution of populations . We will explore principles of evolution, classification, anatomy and physiology, epidemiology, behavior, and basic ecology. The primary focus of the course is on vertebrate animals and vascular plants, but we will make forays into other phylogenetic lineages at intervals. Weekly field and laboratory studies introduce students to the local range of habitats and a broad array of protists, plants, and animals. Attendance at two lectures and one lab each week is required; course evaluation is based on class participation, exams, preparation of a lab/field notebook, and a presentation. It should be stressed that this course emphasizes the unity of the organism within its environment. Ideally students will subsequently enroll in Biology:Cells and Molecules in order to further their exploration of issues in a more reductionist form, but neither course is a pre-requisite for the other. 

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Binoculars and a good pair of walking boots strongly advised. Class Limit: None. Lab Fee: $40. Meets the following degree requirements: ES."
"Why do we get shorter and wrinklier with age?  Were dinosaurs warm-blooded?  How do grasshoppers hop?  These diverse questions are all within the realm of biomechanics.  A knowledge of biomechanics, or the ways in which plants and animals cope with the laws of physics, can promote an understanding of organisms at all levels of organization, from molecules to ecosystems.  In this course we explore several areas of physical science, including mechanical engineering, materials science, and fluid dynamics, as a means of gaining insight into the biological world.  Students attend two lecture sessions per week and one three-hour lab session for discussions of current research in biomechanics, review of homework assignments, and laboratory observations or demonstrations.  Evaluations are based on participation in discussions, weekly problem sets, two term papers, and a final exam.  

Level: Intermediate/Advanced.  Prerequisites:  One college-level course in Biology and one college-level course in Math or Physics or signature of instructor.  
Class limit: 16.  Lab fee: $15.  Meets the following degree requirements: QR ES"
"This course will provide students with a toolbox of techniques in statistical analysis, with a focus on the biological sciences. Students will learn how to choose and apply a variety of widely used statistical tests, how to design experiments and studies with statistical analysis in mind, and how to use a range of specialized statistical approaches for data types frequently encountered in the biological sciences. The methods we will cover include parametric and nonparametric tests; approaches designed for categorical, ordinal, and continuous data; biodiversity statistics and ordination methods; Bayesian vs. frequentist inference; and robust experimental design. The class will highlight the assumptions involved in statistical inference and the conditions that must be met in order to use statistical tests appropriately. In the lab, students will use the statistical programming language R to explore, display, and analyze data using the methods covered in class. By the end of the term, students should be able to choose appropriate analytical methods for a wide range of data types, design statistically valid experiments, and write code for basic statistical tests in R. Students will be evaluated based on daily homework assignments, weekly lab work, several take-home exams, and a final group presentation based on an original analysis of an archived data set chosen by the students. Note: each student should have a laptop for lab (PC preferred; limited support will be provided for Mac users). Contact the instructor if you do not have your own laptop. 

Level: Intermediate/Advanced.  Prerequisites: An introductory course in statistics (Intro to Statistics and Research Design, Probability and Statistics, or equivalent), and permission of instructor.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: QR"
"In Black Atlantic Music students will work to understand how histories of slavery, colonialism, diasporic imagination, and networks of cultural exchange form the basis for popular music in the African diaspora. Tracing musical and political histories through a series of case studies routed throughout the diaspora, this course aims to develop a theory of “the Black Atlantic” as a sonic geography. After establishing a foundation in the key historical forces leading to the creation of the African diaspora, students will explore case studies related to the development of local and transnational musical styles from salsa to hip-hop, funk, reggae and more. We will explore the intersecting work of artists (such as Janelle Monae, Angélique Kidjo, Fela Kuti, Lee “Scratch” Perry, and Bob Marley) and scholars (such as Paul Gilroy, Angela Davis, Amiri Baraka, and Michael Veal). Equal weight in the course will be given to reading, listening, and writing as valuable modes of interacting with music. Throughout the course of the term, students will learn to listen more closely to sound and to develop a critical capacity for relating these sounds to the political and social worlds from which they emerge. Turning our attention back and forth between the local and the transnational, Black Atlantic Music is a window into how music takes shape in the context of culture, politics, geography and history. Evaluations will be based on regular written responses, a final project, and participation in class discussions and activities. 

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisites: None, but previous coursework in anthropology, literature, or history will be helpful.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $35.  Meets the following degree requirements: AD"
"Just three aquatic species account for most seafood consumed in the US: shrimp, tuna, and salmon. But worldwide consumption is more diverse, including an array of finfish, invertebrates, aquatic plants, algae, and other animals. These ‘blue foods’ are fished, collected, gathered, or grown in the sea or freshwater and play essential roles in supporting human health, nutrition, livelihoods, and culture. Recent studies have shown that the top 7 categories of nutrient-rich animal-source foods are all aquatic in origin. So why do food policy and science still heavily focus on terrestrially produced foods, overlooking blue foods? This course will unpack this conundrum and examine blue food systems from ‘bait to plate’ by analyzing food production, provisioning, and consumption as interlinked activities. Blue food production includes small-scale and industrial harvesting and wild capture and aquaculture systems. Provisioning activities link production and consumption: the offloading of catch, storage and transportation of highly perishable foods, transformations from raw fish to the final product, and the marketing and distribution affected to reach consumers. Finally, consumption includes how we acquire our food, cook and eat it, and dispose of waste, as well as our nutritional and health outcomes. While conventional food policy and science have focused on food production in isolation, a food systems framework sheds light on dynamics that impact the flows and distribution of foods with equity implications: which foods are made by whom, where does food go, and who benefits? This course will introduce students to key changes in the goals and means of food policy, focusing on how the emergent dialogue on food systems in fisheries is reframing how we know and govern aquatic resources. A significant portion of the course will be dedicated to examining blue food case studies, which may include: seaweed farming in Tanzania, fishing cooperatives in Mexico, tuna longliners in the Mid-Atlantic, and Lobster fishing in Maine. Students will work in teams to analyze one of these case studies in-depth, applying a food systems lens to examine each case’s sustainability and equity challenges. Students will be evaluated through their participation in class discussions and in-class activities, weekly writing reflections, and co-leading a class with your case study team. The final project will be a group policy proposal outlining how stakeholders could better govern from a ‘food systems’ perspective in your blue food case study.

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: A prior course on food systems of fisheries is beneficial, but not required. Students will be (re)introduced to key concepts in the first few class sessions and apply them throughout the course. Class limit: 15. Lab fee: None."
"You just learned a complex choreography, directed a video shoot, used an iPhone to edit your piece, and published it to an app with over 500 million users. This is video dance in the age of the internet. But how did we get here? This course will work to trace the lineage of dance on camera from early experimental dance films, to Beyoncé music videos, to performance in the public realm of Tik Tok. We will first build a familiarity with common devices and methodologies of dance on camera, contextualizing our learning with examples from the modern and postmodern dance canons. We will respond to readings and viewings with short video studies, writing responses, and rigorous class discussion. As we approach the end of the term we will consider the rapid acceleration of video dance toward social media, working as a cohort of dance scholars to critically examine visibility, accessibility, and performativity in camera dance now. Participation in this course will be an engaged research effort in collaboration with the instructor and fellow classmates, and is recommended for students with a firm grounding in the visual/performing arts. 

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: Prior Arts/Design coursework recommended. Class limit: 10. Lab fee: none."
"This course will cover fermentation from raw material to final commercial production, sales and marketing. Drawing on the instructor’s experience as a micro-brewing entrepreneur, the class will introduce students with all aspects of the art of fermentation/brewing from sourcing ingredients and microbiology to biochemistry and sensory evaluation. This content will be blended with aspects of the business end of producing beer and wines. Students will also learn about branding, value-added production, and running a small local fermentation business. The class will include classroom lecture-based instruction, hands-on elements as well as work sessions and field trips to Fogtown Brewing in Ellsworth. Students will be evaluated on their preparation for class, mini-projects, and an independent final project. Students should plan on making themselves available for classes and work sessions outside of normal class times. Classes such as the Art and Science of Fermentation, The Cider Project, or The Chemistry of Food could be helpful, but the course is intended for a broad range of students with diverse interests who are
willing to dig into the course content.

Level: Introductory. Pre-requisites: None. Class Limit: 12. Lab Fee: $50."
"This companion course to Lichen Biology covers the biology of the group of land plants known collectively as bryophytes, which includes the ""true"" mosses, as well as the liverworts and hornworts.  The course will cover the classification, morphology, life history, physiology, and ecological requirements of the various groups, as well as their rich diversity as directly experienced by students in the field and laboratory where emphasis will be given to the collection, identification, and curation of representative taxa.  The ecology of Sphagnum and peat formation will receive particular attention since poor fens and bogs are such a striking feature of the regional vegetation.  Two all-day field trips are planned.  Students will be evaluated on: (a) class participation, including field trips (20%), (b) demonstrated capacity for doing independent work (20%), and (c) a student final project consisting of a properly identified and curated collection of 30 species of bryophytes excluding taxa identified in class as part of group keying exercises (60%).  

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisite: college level introductory biology or botany course, or consent of the instructor.  Class limit: 8. Lab fee:  $25.  *ES*"
"What is the nature of self? What is the nature of mind? Why do we suffer? What is enlightenment? This course introduces students to the foundations of Buddhist philosophy and practice. Buddhism encompasses a variety of different traditions, teachings, practices, and goals. In this class, we will adopt a philosophical perspective to explore a range of Buddhist thinking on topics such as reality, consciousness, nothingness, and ethical conduct. 

We will begin by reading Asvagho?a's Buddhacarita, which tells the story of Siddhartha Gautama, the historical Buddha. Next, we will study the Theravada, Buddhism's foundational structure, and then proceed to explore the later Mahayana teachings. This course will study primary literature, including excerpts from the Pali Canon and several Mahayana sutras, alongside selections from contemporary thinkers such as Thích Nhat Hanh, angel Kyodo williams, and Pema Chödrön. Along the way, we will discuss suffering (dukkha), emptiness (suññata), impermanence (anicca), non-self (anatta), interdependence or dependent uprising (pa?iccasamuppada), desire (tanha), the four noble truths, the eightfold path, liberation and enlightenment (nibbana), action and causation (kamma), wisdom (pañña), compassion (karuna and bodhicitta), and our responsibilities to other beings. 

Although this course primarily focuses on Buddhist theory and Buddhist texts, students will be briefly introduced to different meditation and mindfulness practices through a series of guest speakers and a weekend visit to the Morgan Bay Zendo in Surry, Maine. This course will be conducted in seminar style with an emphasis on class participation. No prior background in Buddhism or philosophy is required. Course requirements include class participation, weekly writing assignments, a midterm essay, and a final project.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 12. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: HS."
"Buildings account for nearly 40% of global carbon emissions. Sixty percent of Maine homes are heated with heating oil, the highest percentage of any state, and Mainers spend more than a billion dollars on heating oil each year. Improving the efficiency of our homes and buildings is essential for transitioning away from fossil fuels and reducing carbon emissions.

In this course, students will learn how to safely transition buildings away from fossil fuels. This includes understanding the science of energy and moisture movement through a building, how to monitor carbon monoxide and other harmful combustion gases, and methods to reduce energy loss, while maintaining comfortable levels of humidity and fresh air. Students will gain proficiency measuring air leakage with a blower door, using an infrared camera to assess insulation levels, calculating heat loss, and identifying solutions and best practices to develop a plan of action for homeowners.

They will also learn about high efficiency mechanical systems like air source heat pumps, heat pump water heaters, and how to assess lighting and appliance electrical usage. Students will learn how to carry out cost calculations for energy savings and research and share information on rebates and incentives available for homeowners. This will be a very hands-on course, with weekly labs to teach energy auditing field skills. This course will include presentations from local energy contractors, and students will participate in energy audits of residential buildings on or off campus. Through these experiences, students will meet and interact with home performance businesses and non-profit organizations in the local community. As time and weather conditions permit, students will gain experience implementing efficiency solutions such as insulation and air sealing.

Students who successfully complete this course will be able to conduct energy audits for homes, identify cost-effective improvements, and prioritize energy improvements to maximize energy savings. This course will provide students with the tools and experience to reduce building energy use and greenhouse gas emissions in a holistic, whole-building approach.

Evaluation will be based on completion of assignments, participation in class discussions, and mastery of field skills.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: Physics and Mathematics of Sustainable Energy. Class Limit: 12. Lab fee: $50. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"Anyone who is involved with for profit or non-profit enterprises needs to understand a wide variety of interdisciplinary skills. This introductory course will introduce students to marketing, finance, leadership, strategy and other essential areas of knowledge needed to run or participate in any venture. This course is meant to build basic skills and expose students to a variety of business disciplines.

Level:  Introductory.  Class limit: 18.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"The goal of this sequence of courses is to develop the essential ideas of single-variable calculus:  the limit, the derivative, and the  integral.  Understanding concepts is emphasized over intricate  mathematical maneuverings.  The mathematics learned are applied to topics from the physical, natural, and social sciences.  There is a weekly lab/discussion section. Evaluations are based on homework, participation in class and lab, and tests.

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: Precalculus or the equivalent or signature of the instructor.  Class limit: none.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: QR"
"This course is the continuation of Calculus I.  It begins by considering further applications of the integral.  We then move to approximations and series; we conclude the course with a brief treatment of differential equations.  The mathematics learned are applied to topics from the physical, natural, and social sciences. There is a weekly lab/discussion section. Evaluations are based on homework, participation in class and lab, and tests.

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisites: Calculus I or the equivalent.  Lab fee None. Meets the following degree requirements: QR, ES."
"The functions studied in Calculus I and II are one-dimensional.  But the universe of everyday experience is, at minimum, three-dimensional.  In this course we explore how Calculus can be extended so as to apply to functions of more than one variable, and thus apply to the three-dimensional world.  We will begin by reviewing vectors and functions of several variables.  We will then learn about partial derivatives and gradients and how apply these tools to multivariable optimization.  Turning our attention to integral calculus, we will next cover double and triple integrals and their applications.  We will conclude with a treatment of line integrals, flux integrals, the divergence and curl of a vector field, and Green's, and Stokes's theorems.  Evaluation will be based on class participation and lengthy weekly problem sets.  

To enroll in Calculus III students must have a background in single-variable calculus.  Students who have done IB maths at either the standard or higher level, or either the AB or BC Advanced Placement Calculus tests, are ready for Calculus III, as are students who have had Calc I and II here, or at another college.  Calc III re-visits topics from Calc I and II and extends them to multivariable functions and vector fields.  This is a great class for students who want to review their calculus and take their math to the next level.

Level:  Intermediate.   Prerequisites:  Calculus II or the equivalent or signature of instructor.   Lab fee: none.    Meets the following degree requirements: QR"
"Capitalism is the dominant form of economic institutional arrangements and production in the world today, along with a set of culturally inflected values and an interpretive frame for understanding the world around us that is a crucial context for work in Human Ecology. The focus of this course is on the economic imperatives of capitalism, the resulting institutional arrangements, and the socioeconomic outcomes that capitalism produces; we will also dedicate some time to the (other) cultural dimensions of capitalism, largely through the incorporation of guest lecturers in the latter part of the term. The foundational economic analysis will use both Marxist and what can be called “critical macroeconomic” theories to understand the economic processes and results of capitalism. Our focus will be on contemporary capitalism, but we will briefly examine the historical development of capitalism as a means of understanding contemporary patterns. A major impetus for the course is Thomas Piketty’s ""Capitalism in the 21st Century"", and its focus on inequality will be a major focus of the course. Other prominent themes will be pre-capitalist modes of production, the labor theory of value, markets and processes of labor commodification and alienation, the formal and informal institutions of capitalism, money and other forms of debt, international capitalistic relations, crises, and variations of contemporary capitalism. Learning will be accomplished via the reading, study, analysis, and discussion of classic and contemporary theories of capitalism, and applications to current local, national, and international situations and events. Evaluation will be based on four major problem sets (consisting of short essay responses), a final poster presentation, and participation in classroom discussions and other fora.

Level: Advanced.  Prerequisites: One course in intermediate economics and one additional intermediate course that closely relates to the study capitalism (e.g. another economics course, critical theory, etc.), and permission of instructor.  Class limit: 10.  Lab fee: none.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS HY"
"This is a laboratory course which is one of three courses required to be taken together. The three courses make up a ""monster course"" with the overall title ""The Story of Humans in Maine Told Through Sediment"". In this course students will learn and use techniques to develop chronologies for human occupation of watersheds. From sediment cores of Maine lakes, we will develop an age/depth model based on radiocarbon dating of organic matter throughout the core (sticks, bugs, seeds, etc). Together, we will slice sediment cores into individual centimeter-by-centimeter cross sections and analyze these for charcoal as a proxy for fire events as well as identifying and quantifying human biochemical markers (coprostanol, stigmastanol, cholesterol, sitosterol), the ratios of which can indicate the absence or presence of humans throughout time. In a region where acidic soils rapidly degrade physical evidence of cultural sites, our recent use of this technique has helped to fill in gaps in the archaeological record. This course is relevant for students interested in biochemistry, Wabanaki history, ecology and anthropology. In the lab, students will perform extractions, inject samples on a gas chromatography mass spectrometer, and interpret the data to quantify amounts of human biochemical markers. Students will be evaluated on participation in laboratory exercises, and through write-ups of their results.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Co-requisites: ES2052 Gas Chromatography Mass Spectrometry and ES2053 The Analytical Chemistry of Paleoecology. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: None. Meets the following requirements: ES."
"Carbon is the building block of life. It is also central to one of the most critical challenges of this century: climate change. Combustion of fossilized carbon leads to the increase in atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide that threaten life across the planet. Trees and other living organisms that store carbon are celebrated as solutions to the growing crisis, yet rampant destruction of these carbon stores continues unabated. The global management of carbon and its impacts includes projects to decarbonize economies and recarbonize ecologies, as well as fantastical technofixes for carbon removal and blocking the sun. Who will decide how much fossil carbon ultimately gets burned? How much land will be claimed by elites to soak up their continued fossil emissions, and where will it be located? What role do carbon markets and geoengineering play in addressing or perpetuating fossil economies? These are some of the questions we will explore.

In the course we use several different theoretical lenses that look at intersections of institutions, nature, economy, and power (critical geography, political ecology, political economy) to understand more deeply the political, economic, and ecological relationships that emerge around forms of carbon (fossil fuels, trees and landscapes, monoculture plantations) in the context of global efforts to address climate change. Topics to be covered include the carbon cycle; carbon economies of coal, oil, and gas; international climate treaties and global politics of governing carbon; carbon markets; climate models; geoengineering and carbon removal; carbon democracy and fossil capital. The aim of the inquiry, and what students should expect to take away from the course, is experience in engaging with theoretical texts and a broader and deeper understanding of the global political economy and local political ecologies of climate change and carbon. Readings will come from academic as well as non-academic literature from think tanks, non-governmental organizations, and social movements. The course will be conducted in a seminar format, with emphasis on class discussion of readings. Students will be evaluated based on engagement in class discussions, regular writing assignments, leading one or more class discussions, and a final project (podcast, presentation, or final synthetic essay).

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: One or more courses in natural or physical sciences, social theory, economics and/or politics.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"In this course, students will develop a deep understanding of how their personal and professional identities intersect, how to apply and communicate their skills and interests through career experiences, and how to navigate a fulfilling and purposeful life. Students will first and foremost learn to look at their career development through the lens of career ecology, which is applying human ecology as a lens to examine one’s career experiences and professional identity within natural, social, and economic systems. The goal of seeing career development through a career ecology lens is to construct strong identity foundations and continue on a path to professional authenticity, finding one’s sense of purpose, and career fulfillment. 

This course is designed to meet all students where they are in their COA journey: from first-year exploration through seniors preparing for graduation. This class is useful before you complete your internship requirement, but can also help you prepare for post-graduation success. Students will learn how their career ecosystems and professional identities are deeply influenced by one's familial, cultural, regional, religious, historical, and spiritual experiences, as well as by personal beliefs, views, strengths, and abilities. We will further investigate ways in which one participates in ecosystems through paid work, volunteering, government service, research, writing, community service, leadership, and how to find mentorship and support. 

Students will learn through written reflections, participating in course discussions on readings and with course visitors, completing career assessments like the Clifton Strengths to understand personal strengths and values, completing professional writing assignments like resumes and cover letters, participating in hands-on networking and interviewing practice, and reading and incorporating design thinking strategies from the text Designing Your Life (Burnett & Evans, 2016). 

Evaluation and assessment will be based on active participation in course discussions (discussions on readings and with course visitors), completing professional writing assignments (e.g., resumes and cover letters), reflection essays, and oral presentations. 

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: $50.  Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"This beginning course in ceramics will explore the making of objects with clay by using the potter's wheel, slab roller, coils and press molds. We will explore surface design using slips, under glazes and glazes and patterns.  Through these methods we will incorporate wax resist, tape resist, plastic resist, sgraffito, slip and glaze trailing. Six hand-built and twenty wheel-thrown works are required, with reviews taking place during week five and week ten. 

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $95.  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS"
"What do Haydn, Mozart, Beethoven, and Brahms have in common? They are all considered great masters of classical music, having written several works for large symphony orchestras. But they also wrote music for smaller ensembles called chamber music. What is chamber music and how has it developed through the centuries? How is it relevant today? 
The bulk of this course is a lab/ensemble opportunity to perform in small chamber groups, based on experience and following a musical score. To deepen our understanding of the music we play, it's helpful to understand the political, social and cultural trends that influenced and shaped chamber music across the Baroque, Classical, Romantic and Modern eras. There will be mini lessons about the composers and their places in history, along with listening guides, but the majority of class time will be spent in rehearsals coached by the instructors. Music will be chosen by the instructors based on demonstrated abilities, with input from participating students. 
Other aspects of the class include a trip to a live performance, some research, listening assignments, and a written essay. 

Evaluations are based on musical collaboration/participation, practice/preparation outside of class time and assignments.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: Experience playing an instrument or singing in an ensemble (example: high school band or choir) and/or an ability to read music at a proficient level. Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"How have schools changed and how should schools change to ensure ""the good life""?  This interdisciplinary, team-taught course examines the potential and limits of a human ecological education as an instrument of enlightened progress and lasting positive social, cultural, and environmental change.  It explores three essential questions about education and its relationship to human development and social progress.  Looking at the role of formal educational institutions and their relationship to government and other social institutions: What is the role of schools in development and social change?  Considering the role of teachers as agents of change: What is the role of the teacher in school/organizational change and community development?  And finally, reflecting on our subjective motives for working in the field of education:  Why do you want to become an educator?   Through course activities such as service-learning in schools and group project work on a contemporary educational phenomenon (e.g., school choice, new technologies for learning, single-sex education), students will learn how educational policy at the federal, state, and local levels impacts teaching and learning, investigate the moral dimensions of the teacher-student relationship, and reflect on the construct of teacher-learners.  Students will be introduced to a variety of educational research methods (i.e, ethnography, case study, quasi-experimental, correlational) that will allow for critical analysis of the knowledge base that strives to impact educational policy and practice. Evaluation will be based on participation, reflective writing, service learning, and group projects and presentations.

Level: Introductory.   Class limit: 15.  Offered every other year. Lab fee: $20.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS, ED"
"The origin of life remains one of science’s greatest unresolved questions. In this tutorial, students will delve into competing theories regarding the chemical origins of life on Earth and other planets. Of the many environments proposed as potential hatcheries for the first living beings, alkaline hydrothermal vents stand out for providing a remarkable link between geology and biology. These vents are not volcanic, but produced by “serpentinization”, i.e. the reaction of the ubiquitous mineral olivine with water in the mantle, which results in the release of alkaline fluids (OH–), hydrogen (H2), sulphides (HS–), and ammonia (NH3). The fluids would have percolated through the crust and met seawater, which, due to anoxic conditions and high volcanic activity on the early Earth, was comparatively acidic (H+), and rich in carbon dioxide (CO2), ferrous iron (Fe2+), and nickel (Ni2+). The meeting of these two fluids produced the precipitation of iron (and nickel)-sulphur clusters (Fe(Ni)S), which we will investigate as a catalyst for the production of organic compounds from CO2. In a collaboration with researchers from NASA’s Jet Propulsion Lab, and the Ludwig Maximillian University of Munich, we will build a microfluidic device that mimics in a laboratory setting, the conditions of an early-Earth hydrothermal vent (high temperature, high pressure, and inclusion of the various gaseous and ionic solutes). This microfluidic device will connect directly to a mass spectrometer (MS) to analyse the production of organic compounds. If organic compounds are detected by MS, further characterization via Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) will be carried out at Colby College. Students will be evaluated based on their participation in the discussion of primary literature and their laboratory work. Participation in this tutorial will be a prerequisite for any student wishing to participate in a paid summer internship (potentially coupled with a Fall or Spring term) at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Lab. 

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: College-level chemistry or geology course and permission from the instructor. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: $50. Meets the following degree requirements: none."
"Introductory chemistry and biology are explored in the context of food and drink: the biology of crops, culinary chemistry, and the biochemistry of brewing. Major chemistry topics include atomic structure, periodicity, bonding, acid base chemistry, kinetics, equilibrium, colloids, and solubility of gases in liquids. Major biology topics include photosynthesis, respiration, plant and yeast life histories, cellular reproduction, and metabolism. We will also explore agricultural chemistry from a systems perspective: examining strategies to for keeping pace with the demand for nitrogen and phosphorous in soils. This course is meant to offer important, fundamental chemistry and biology through the framework of food, a universal human experience. These fundamental topics in Chemistry and Biology will be explored from the ground up, so no prior experience is required. Meanwhile, the culinary and agricultural framework should offer enough new content for students with a background in natural sciences. Students will be evaluated based on participation in classroom and laboratory sessions, projects, and quizzes.

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: $60.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES"
"This is the first half of a two-term sequence designed to help students describe and understand properties of materials. The course first explores how atomic and molecular structure relates to the physical properties of materials and their reactivity. The course explores the reasons, rates, and outcomes of chemical reactions. Course material is applied to better understand living systems, the natural environment, and industrial products. The course meets for three hours of lecture/discussion and for three hours of lab each week. Students are strongly urged to take both terms of this course. Evaluations are based on class participation, lab reports, and quizzes. 

Level:  Introductory. Prerequisites: none. Class limit: 14. Lab fee: none. Meets the following degree requirements: ES, QR."
"This is the second half of a two-term sequence designed to help students describe and understand properties of materials.  This course begins with a survey of how the internal structure of atoms leads to the formation of different sorts of bonds between them. It then considers how weaker forces can arise between molecules and the sorts of physical phenomena that such forces explain. The class concludes by considering how to describe and explain the rates at which (and the extents to which) chemicals reactions occur and applies such descriptions and explanations to common types of reactions (acid/base and redox).  Throughout the course, examples are drawn from living systems, the natural environment, and industrial products.  The course meets for three hours of lecture/discussion and for three hours of lab each week.  Chemistry 1 is a strongly recommended a prerequisite for this course. Evaluations are based on class participation, homework, midterm and final exams and a term project or paper. 

Level:  Introductory.  Class limit: 15. Lab fee: None.  Meets the following requirements: ES, QR.  Offered every year."
"How does a child think? What causes him/her to learn? What teaching approaches work best with young children? These questions and more will be explored through readings, lectures, field observations, and planned class activities. This course will provide an introduction to early childhood education (preschool to eighth grade). Theorists such as Piaget, Vygotsky, Montessori, Gardner, Erikson, Maslow, Kohlberg, and Gilligan will be used to examine the physical, mental, emotional, moral, and social aspects of childhood growth and development. Students  will explore a range of curriculum models, approaches, and strategies as they learn to apply developmental theory to best practices. These best practices will include  the role of teachers in creating meaningful learning experiences and classroom environments (curriculum), documenting learning, assessment, inclusion, and family involvement. The primary modes of instruction for this class will be lectures, classroom discussions, field observations/reflections, and cooperative hands-on learning activities.  Short reflective papers, an observational journal, and class projects will be used to assess learning. 

Level: Introductory. Class limit: 15. Meets the following degree requirements: ED"
"This course is a broad overview of children's literature and its place in the elementary school classroom.  It examines the range and trends in literature for children that includes all genres, prominent authors, illustrators, awards, critical evaluation, and integration into instruction across the curriculum.  Students participate in and design lessons which incorporate or extend children's response to literature.  They survey poetry and media appropriate for elementary students.  Students read an extensive amount of children's literature, keep a response journal, develop an author study, and create a teaching unit using children's literature.

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: none.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: none.  Meets the following degree requirements: ED"
"Production modes, market concerns, and privilege of access, in addition to the greater concerns of racism, sexism, classism and other social biases have all historically contributed to the predominance of a narrow range of cinematic voices being experienced by most audiences. But from the dawn of cinema there have been those working on the edges to realize visions that speak to many modes of otherness and to different manners of being, of belonging. In this class we will investigate a range of diverse moving image works and engage with texts that help contextualize and elucidate the works and the creative impulses/individuals behind them. The roster of movies viewed this term will be chosen collaboratively from a curated list by the group at the beginning of the term so as to most effectively engage with the particular interests of this configuration of students; choices include (but are not limited to) films and videos made by and about members of the following communities: LGBTQ+, neurodiversity, seniors, economically disadvantaged, homeless, people with disabilities, people of faith, Inuit, Roma, Sami, Maya, Palawan, Amhara, African diaspora, Indigenous peoples of the US and Australia. Focus will be primarily on narrative forms, but some works with experimental aspects may be featured. Potential filmmakers include: Samira Makhmalbaf, David Gulpilil, Cheryl Dunye, Tony Gatlif, Euzhan Palcy, Haile Gerima, Mati Diop, Derek Jarman. Students will be evaluated on their participation in class discussions and on two papers written over the course of the term. In these papers students will be asked to demonstrate a balance between research into a group of works of their choosing and exploration of their own aesthetic and emotional responses to these works.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: none. Class limit: 16. Lab fee: $30. Meets the following degree requirements: AD"
"This class focuses on American fiction from the realist/naturalist period (roughly 1860-1920), a time when enormous changes were occurring in and on the American landscape.  Increasing urbanization, immigration, and industrialization corresponded both with a desire for 'realistic' fiction of social problems, and nostalgic stories of a more 'realistic' rural life.  For the first time there was a national literature, resulting from the capabilities of large publishing houses, urban centers and mass production - but this national literature was acutely self-conscious of regional differences, and especially of the tension between city and country.  As writers tried to paint the American landscape in literature, their works subsumed major social issues to place and formal arguments about the true nature of realistic description.  Examining works that portray factory towns, urban tenements, midwestern prairies, New England villages, and the broad spectrum of American landscapes, we look at how a complex, turbulent, multi-ethnic, and simultaneously urban and rural American culture defined itself, its realism, and thus its gender, class, race, and social relations and sense of values, against these landscapes.  There are two extra, evening classes during week 7 (Short Fiction Week), and a modest lab fee.  Evaluation is based on weekly response papers, two short papers, and a short fiction project, as well as class participation.

Introductory/Intermediate.  Prerequisite:  Writing Seminar I (or the equivalent). Class limit: 15.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"Through the lens of maple production, we will explore a variety of chemistry, biology, and climate science topics, including: climate, seasonality, plant physiology, density, (reverse) osmosis, and the chemistry of sugars. The hands-on aspects of these topics will be covered during an intensive 2-week period over spring break, which historically overlaps with the maple sap run in this area. Students will learn how to identify maple, birch, butternut and other tree species which produce viable sap for syrup production. Students will tap these trees, collect the sap, and concentrate it by reverse osmosis and by boiling. Students will also learn how to prune fruit trees, and why we do this in the same season. Students will be evaluated based on their participation in the 2-week spring-break session, as well as through assignments, papers, and a final project completed during the spring term. 
 
Level: Introductory: Prerequisites: Permission of Instructor. Class Limit: 6.  Lab Fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: none."
"This class will explore general weather and climate patterns on global, regional, and local scales.  We will discuss the major forcings driving global climate fluctuations - on both long (millions of years) and short (days) timescales, including natural and anthropogenic processes. We will also learn about basic meteorology and the processes producing some common spectacular optical weather phenomena (rainbows, coronas, cloud-types, etc). Students will complete a term project comprising a photo-documentary journal of the different weather phenomena they observe during the 10-week term. The field component of this course will be self-guided through the observation and documentation of weather phenomena.  Who should take this course: No prior geology/science experience is needed - but expect to do a bit of basic math in this course! The course level is intermediate because it will not cover foundational principles of geology (or other sciences) but instead the course will be integrative and require students to practice both their quantitative and qualitative skills. Take this course if you are passionate or curious about climate change, but do not know much about the science of climate and weather!
 
Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisites: none.  Class limit: 16.  Lab fee:  $10  Meets the following degree requirements: ES"
"Climate change is one of the biggest and most difficult challenges faced by contemporary societies. The challenge has multiple facets: environmental, social, political, economic – each with its own complexities. This course focuses primarily on the social, political and economic components of the climate problem, framed by the concept of climate justice. In the course students are introduced to basic conceptions of justice, the latest findings of climate science and possible impacts on regional scales, and the global politics of climate change, principally in the context of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change. Climate justice and its operationalization is the principal organizing theme for work over the term, addressing questions such as: how the costs of climate change impacts and efforts to address climate change could or should be distributed between rich and poor, global north and global south; and what are the possible means whereby those costs might be addressed through collective action at various levels: local, national, and global. Students will be evaluated based on regular quizzes, several short papers, class participation, and a final synthetic paper or project. 

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 25. Lab fee: $10. Meets the following requirements: HS"
"In this intermediate to advanced studio course, we will explore various ways to make films together in small teams, including with people outside the course. Student films will explore genres from narrative to documentary to experimental. Collaboration is unlike the Hollywood model where making a film brings together highly skilled individuals that interlock like parts of a machine and are disbanded when the task of making the film is complete. These are managed in a top down fashion, meant to be efficient and to build products (films) designed for profit. We will attempt to eschew these hierarchical systems in favor of processes that honor the ideas and voices of the video makers (and subjects when present). Collaboration can create a dynamic process when artists exchange ideas and perspectives. You will be challenged to incorporate other artists’ ways of working and to try new creative methods and approaches. We will attempt to design systems and parameters that offer agency to all collaborators. We will experience various approaches to creative collaboration and sharing leadership. Depending on student interests, these may include works that emphasize the creation of a team as a whole, multimedia approaches, partnering with documentary subjects, and chance operations. In-class exercises and experiments will provide jumping-off points for more in-depth works as the term progresses. Students should bring some experience in filmmaking to the course.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: Filmmaking skills. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: $50.  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS."
"Natural history collections are important artifacts that provide pivotal information on the past, present, and future of our natural world. They document species ecology and distribution, changes in aspects of phenotypes, and aid in conservation initiatives. Collections have tremendous value in understanding and documenting our natural and cultural world. Yet their history, and the practice of scientific collecting, is muddled with bias, controversy, and colonial practices. Through discussion and practice, we will explore the science and art of scientific collecting, preparing, and caring for specimens (plant and animal). We will discuss the history of scientific collections, and collection practices, and consider their role and value. We will visit natural history museums, their collections, and the curators that care for them. Thus, there are two required field trips, including one overnight. We will also practice the art of specimen preparation and care, learning different preparation and cataloging techniques. This class is open to anyone with any interest or curiosity about natural history museums, collections or scientific collecting. It is recommended for students interested in museology techniques or those interested in pursuing careers in museum studies. Assessments include written responses to weekly prompts, discussion participation, written essays, and a term project.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 11.  Lab fee: $175.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES."
"How many times have you mused about the idea of borders? What do the lines that divide us mean, and how are we to make sense of them? Literature has always been a place where questions like these have been thought aloud. Whether the borders are geographical or metaphorical, whether they keep people out or fence people in, borders are liminal spaces that raise questions about politics, oppression, belongingness, and identity, which makes them an important subject for our interrogation. Since these literatures are born of political events, our first concern will be to understand the history of the events themselves. We will achieve that by reading excerpts from the works of Gyanendra Pandey, Stanley Waterman, Joe Cleary, and others in juxtaposition with literature. In addition, the literary works by Saadat Hasan Manto, Seamus Deane, Gloria Anzaldúa, and the like will help put the bigger picture in perspective bringing in various thematic concerns like religion, violence, language, and gender together. This class will thus explore two types of borders: one that course texts evoke, helping you critically engage with the theme. The other kind exists between various genres you will encounter like short stories, novels, literary theory, official reports, and movies. The latter, coupled with your writing assignments that we will workshop throughout the term—personal narrative, online article, movie review, multimodal project, and others—will facilitate and deepen your understanding not only of literature from the borders but also writing as a process—prewriting, writing, and rewriting. This course meets the writing requirement.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate.  Prerequisites: Some knowledge about world history and experience in writing about literature would help.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS, W"
"This class focuses on U.S. fiction from the realist/naturalist period (roughly 1860-1920), a time when enormous changes were occurring in and on the U.S. landscape. Increasing urbanization, immigration, and industrialization corresponded both with a desire for ‘realistic’ fiction of social problems, and nostalgic stories of a more 'realistic' rural life. For the first time there was a national literature, resulting from the capabilities of large publishing houses, urban centers and mass production — but this national literature was acutely self-conscious of regional differences, and especially of the tension between city and country. Examining works that portray factory towns, urban tenements, midwestern prairies, New England villages, and the broad spectrum of U.S. landscapes of the period, we look at how a complex, turbulent, multi-ethnic, and simultaneously urban and rural American culture defined itself, and thus its gender, class, race, and social relations, and sense of values, against these landscapes. There is a strong emphasis on reading, writing, and discussion. Students will write and revise three critical analyses over the course of the term. Given that the class covers a lot of intellectual and historical ground, students will also do a short fiction project and develop a research paper on their author, landscape, and historical moment. Evaluation will be based on class participation, the writing process for the critical analyses, and the proposal, presentation, and research paper for the short fiction project.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: none.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS, W"
"From McLuhan on, the term media (frequently a plural word employed as singular) has been notoriously difficult to define. Starting in the mid-1980s, scholars, theorists, and practitioners added the modifier new to the mix. What are/is new media and when does it become old? In this course we’ll study foundational texts in this recent field –– Manovich, Rice, Doane, Kittler –– along with historical influences and parallel thinkers –– Lovelace, Haraway, Brand –– and artists such as Mendi & Keith Obadike, Jennifer Chan, Electronic Disturbance Theater –– to determine for our-selves what new media have most to offer a human ecologist. Many observers have pointed to the fact that cinematic technologies and humans’ adaptation to them anticipated many traits and use patterns of digital media. We will look at the ephemerality of newness as we explore what lessons studying old (previously new) media can afford us. Media culture affects our interpretation of the events that occur to and around us, how we teach and learn, our choices regarding how we spend our time and money; and increasingly influences not only how we construct our identities externally, but how we initially establish a sense of self, a set of values, and a conception of how to engage in community. Current issues studied in the class will depend on the interests of the group but may include debates in any of the following areas: genre, archival practices, simulation/reproducibility/modes of consumption, social media & democracy, technology/inclusion/representation, production/access/ownership/copyright/remix culture, media convergence. This course is a college seminar which meets the first-year writing requirement. We will focus on writing as process—prewriting, writing, and rewriting. Students will write and revise three short essays over the course of the term, meeting weekly with the professor or TA and participating in peer-review as part of the writing lab component of the class. Each student will also develop a research paper on a topic of their own choosing determined in consultation with course faculty and TA. Evaluation will be based on class participation; commitment to and effective use of the writing process; and the proposal for, presentation of, and research into their final project.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: HS, W."
"This course emphasizes field studies of the ecology of Mount Desert Island, incorporating labs and field trips.  Each exercise focuses on a central ecological concept.  Topics include intertidal biology and diversity, forest trees and site types, bedrock geology, soil biology, insect diversity, pollination ecology, freshwater biology, predation, herbivory, and the migration of birds.  Discussions include the development of natural history as a science and the role of natural selection in the evolution of diversity.  Students are expected to keep a field notebook or journal, to undertake a project, and to write a term paper.  Class meets for two lecture sessions and one lab session or two field/lab sessions per week.  The course is particularly appropriate for students concentrating in Environmental Education.  This class is intended for first year students, who will have priority during registration.  Returning students may take this course with permission of the instructor. This course meets the first year writing course requirement.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None; field work involves strenuous hiking. Class Limit: 11. Lab fee: $75.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES,W"
"The Monster is real, and it’s calling.
-Michelle Mcnamara

Grew up reading Nancy Drew and Miss Marple? Can’t let a day go by without listening to a murder mystery podcast like Serial or My Favorite Murder? Love binge-watching shows like Killing Eve and Big Little Lies? Consider watching true crime documentaries your hobby? Then this is the class for you.

This college seminar will allow you to delve into the world of murder, mysteries, and the mayhem caused by these through a woman’s eyes. Be it a woman sleuth, a femme fatale, or a damsel in distress, women have been inextricably related to the world of crime. It is no wonder that they make up almost 75% of the listeners of true-crime podcasts and 80% of CrimeCon attendees (Times.com). We will study this phenomenon by paying close attention to not only literary genres like novels, short stories, and non-fiction writing but also non-literary (and multimodal) genres that include pop-culture favorites like TV shows, documentaries, and podcasts, some of which are mentioned above. Other works that we might consider are Sharp Objects (fiction), Dial A for Aunties (fiction), I’ll be Gone in the Dark (non-fiction), Mommy Dead and Dearest (documentary), and The Keepers (documentary).

Since this class also meets the writing requirement, part of your focus will be understanding writing as a dynamic literate activity by composing varied works. For example, you’ll write short reflection posts responding to questions like “Why women kill”?, opinion or review pieces that could appear in The New York Times, conduct interviews, and work on a term-long genre evolution project. All these are different genres and might target a specific audience: me, online readers, fans, or your peers. You will be evaluated on class participation, written work, and a final project.

Students will be evaluated on class participation, written work, and a final project. Lots of attention will be paid to peer review and revision as well.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS, W."
"Eating is both a biological need and an intensely social activity. This course examines the evolution, diversity, social significance, and health consequences of the human diet across time and space. Designed as a college seminar, this course introduces students to writing as process—prewriting, writing, and rewriting—and the broad and dynamic subfield of nutritional anthropology. Through academic articles, films, and guest lectures, the course weaves together the biological and cultural threads of anthropology to consider human nutrition in all its complexity. The course is designed to complement The Anthropology of Food by focusing in on biocultural approaches to the study of human diets. The course covers foundations and theories of nutritional anthropology, the evolution and adaptation of human diets, dietary transitions and globalization, and under- and over-nutrition. Students are evaluated based on class participation, a series of synthesis papers, a critical analysis paper, and a research project including a paper and an audio-visual presentation.

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $10.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS, W"
"In rural areas throughout the world, citizens, nonprofit leaders, agency staff, and elected officials are coming together to frame complex issues and bring about change in local policy and practice. This course outlines the theory and practice of community development, drawing on the instructor’s experience with the Dùthchas Project for sustainable community development in the Highlands and Islands of Scotland, Mount Desert Island Tomorrow, and other examples in the literature. In short, community development allows community members to frame issues, envision a preferred future, and carry out projects that move the community toward that preferred future. By using writing as process—prewriting, writing, and rewriting—to frame and communicate complex public issues, students gain practical skills in listening, designing effective meetings, facilitation, project planning and developing local policy. Readings, discussions, and guests introduce students to community development theory and practice. Class projects are connected to community issues on Mount Desert Island. By writing and revising short papers, students can reflect on class content, community meetings, newspaper stories, and reading assignments. Evaluation will be based on preparation for and participation in class discussion, several short papers, participation in field work, and contribution to a successful group project. This class meets the first-year writing course requirement.

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: W HS"
"This course uses food as a lens to explore human origins, cultural diversity, social structure, and human/environment interactions. Through academic articles and films, the course exposes students to the different ways anthropologists think about food and the frameworks they use to answer questions concerning the human experience. The course also engages other disciplinary perspectives—including history, economics, and political ecology—to make larger connections between food and society.

Designed as a survey course, this course introduces students not only to writing as process—prewriting, writing, and rewriting—but also to the broad and dynamic subfield of food anthropology. The course is organized around four themes. The first—human origins, diets, and biocultural evolution—explores the uniqueness of cooking to the human species, and how the co-evolution of human diets and culture has shaped different groups' dietary needs, practices, and restrictions. The second—globalization and international trade—looks at the flow of foods and food practices around the world, from sugar to sushi. The third—hegemony and difference—considers how race, gender, and class are constructed and expressed through food. The final theme—consumption and embodiment—considers the relationship between eating and the body; readings in this section focus on body image, eating practices, and critical studies of the rhetoric around hunger and obesity. Students are evaluated based on class participation, a series of reflection papers, a dietary analysis, and a recipe project involving a prepared meal, an audio-visual presentation, and a critical analysis paper.  This course meets the first-year writing requirement.

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $20.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS, W"
"As a Pakistani-American teenager from New Jersey, Kamala Khan must contend with being a non-white female offspring of an immigrant family, a reality further complicated by her newfound superhero abilities. In this college seminar course, we will dive into the world of Kamala Khan as she follows in the footsteps of her role model and the first Ms. Marvel, Carol Danvers, one of the few female superheroes in the universe. She’ll change your idea of a superhero and what it means to be one as she balances her personal and superhero identity and navigates questions of race, religion, culture, power, and teenage angst.

We will explore all the abovementioned ideas and more as we read three to four volumes of Ms. Marvel comics (2014 onwards), paying attention to storytelling through the genre of sequential art. We will also watch the recent TV adaptation (2022) and finally pair the two with theories of race, Islamophobia, gender, and current world politics. Since this class also meets the writing requirement, part of your focus will be on understanding the writing process by composing varied works. For example, you’ll write short blog posts responding to questions like, “Are comics literature?”, opinion pieces that could appear in The New York Times, and fan fiction. All these are different genres and targeted at a specific audience, me, online readers, fans, and your peers. You will be evaluated on class participation, written work, oral presentation, and a final project.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS, W."
"The practice of social dreaming has a long history in philosophical thinking, stretching back to Hesiod and Plato. What constitutes a perfect or ideal society? Or, if no such place is possible, what makes for a well-functioning society? Likewise, what constitutes a terrible society? What kind of places and spaces do we want to avoid? These are important questions for human ecologists to ask as we seek to improve our relationships with our natural, social, and technological environments. To explore questions of ideal and flawed places, this course studies the concepts of utopia and dystopia across a range of philosophical, political, and literary writings. Although we will focus our attention on theoretical literature, we will read several novels and short stories, and students will present research on a work of utopian or dystopian fiction.

Additional course questions include: What motivates us to envision utopias and dystopias? Does political philosophy require a utopian vision? What do utopias and dystopias tell us about social fears, anxieties, and hopes? Course readings will focus on classical Greek thought, Enlightenment thought, political theory, and critical theory. Texts may include Plato’s Republic, Thomas More’s Utopia, Marx and Engels’ Communist Manifesto, William Godwin’s Enquiry Concerning Political Justice, Sigmund Freud’s Civilization and Its Discontents, Charlotte Perkins Gilman’s Herland, Octavia Butler’s Blood Child, Ursula K. LaGuin’s The Ones Who Walk Away From Omelas, Hannah Arendt’s The Origins of Totalitarianism, George Orwell’s Nineteen Eighty-Four, and selections form The Utopian Reader by Gregory Claeys and Lyman Tower Sargent. Since this course is being offered as a college seminar and will meet the first-year writing requirement, we will focus on writing as process—prewriting, writing, and rewriting. As students draft bi-weekly writing assignments, they will meet with the professor or TA either individually or as part of a weekly writing lab. Papers will be peer reviewed and each student will be expected to revise each paper. In addition to bi-weekly papers, there will be an in-class presentation, a midterm exam, and a final paper.

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $30.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS, W"
"How and why are we here, at College of the Atlantic, nestled and nesting together on an island along the coast of Downeast Maine? We’ll appreciate our surroundings, and our purpose as stewards of our environment, by exploring a few writers who have inspired our understanding of where we stand on the world around us. And we’ll learn to write like them. Henry David Thoreau wrote about walking and living in the woods in his journal Walden. Rachel Carson discovered the beauty and power of our oceans in The Sea Around Us. Aldo Leopold went back to the land and took many readers with him in A Sand County Almanac. Robin Wall Kimmerer embraced “the notion that plants and animals are our oldest teachers” in Braiding Sweetgrass. Terry Tempest Williams meditated on the meanings and merits of places like Acadia National Park and “why wild lands matter to the soul of America” in The Hour of Land. We’ll spend some hours reading excerpts of these and other works, including a few of Basho’s haikus, Mary Oliver’s Devotions, Richard Powers’s The Overstory, Jesmyn Ward’s Salvage the Bones, Thich Nhat Hanh’s Zen and the Art of Saving the Planet, wandering through the woods, and putting our words in print and into action. This course is a college seminar and meets the first-year writing requirement. We meet three times a week–twice to discuss the readings and once a week in a writing workshop where students will work on their writing using writing as process–prewriting, writing, and rewriting. In both the workshop and some discussion classes, we will also peer review papers. Students will be evaluated on their participation in class discussions and peer reviews, as well as their ability to use writing as process to craft and substantively revise their essays.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: W"
"Picture this: you and your friends are grabbing burgers and you overhear someone order a pop. You instantly get the urge to correct them because soda is the proper word you were taught. Later, the server brings the coke they ordered, which further increases your urge to intervene because they actually ordered Sprite. After all, soda is the correct word. Or is it? Which word is correct? Actually, they all are.

Linguistic variation is inherent to all languages and from a linguistic standpoint, all languages are equal. Yet, humans are continuously judged, evaluated, and discriminated against based on how they speak and write in professional, academic, and everyday settings. These seemingly innocuous comments about correctness have harmful effects on people who don’t conform to perceived language standards. As a result, various forms of discrimination and policies that exist continue to marginalize people due to misinformation and in some cases, disinformation. In this class, we will examine the intersections of language, ideology, and discrimination in everyday, educational, and professional settings while developing our research practices.

Classes will be facilitated through weekly reading discussions and discourse analysis of data (i.e., data sessions) in small and whole group activities. Readings will address the intersections of language and discrimination, such as accentism, racialization, language subordination, and social identities. The class will provide foundational concepts from applied linguistics and related fields, such as sociolinguistics and linguistic anthropology. The course is also focused on developing your research literacies and project management skills. You will learn how to develop and carry out a project, evaluate the credibility of information, and various types of data. Labs will be used to create space for data sessions and peer-reviews.

Through discourse analysis, you will apply concepts you learned in class to develop your understanding of linguistic diversity and language related issues. Projects can utilize print and digital media to address, for instance, monolingual policies and their impact in educational or workplace settings, intersections of language and gender or race, and various forms of linguistic discrimination in the US or other contexts.

There are no prerequisites and this course is suitable for students who are curious about language, discourse, social issues, as well as research. Students will be evaluated based on completed assignments, such as readings and other homework, research projects, peer-review, and overall class contributions, including lab sessions. You must be prepared to reflect on implicit biases and perceptions of language and rethink how you approach and conceptualize research. This course meets both the writing requirement and HS requirement as it develops genre knowledge, rhetorical awareness, understanding of writing as dynamic and iterative processes, and research literacies grounded in social sciences.

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: HS, W."
"This course is designed for science students developing their research skills working on research projects for a principal investigator; specifically this course will improve the students' writing ability and introduce them to writing for the scientific community and the lay public.  The course involves not only learning to write an abstract and literature review but also understanding the protocols for writing a scientific paper based on lab or field data.  In addition, students will prepare a power point presentation on their research to present at a meeting or conference such as the Maine Biological Science Symposium or the annual INBRE meeting.  In addition to working with the instructor, students will work on the content of their writing with the principal investigator. Offered every other year.

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisite: Signature of instructor.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $20.  Meets the following degree requirements: W"
"Climate change poses an existential threat to life as we know it. This class’s goal is to move beyond the paralyzing and frustrating national and international policy making related to climate change and to focus on what can be done at a community level. The broad impacts of climate change do not lend themselves to narrow disciplinary solutions – they require an integrated human ecological approach that brings together multiple disciplines and varied problem solving skills. This project-oriented course will create the opportunity for advanced students to study and design real-world practical solutions for reducing greenhouse gas emissions and adapting to the impacts of climate change. Student teams will design a project in collaboration with a community, government, business, or nonprofit partner. All projects will consider issues of feasibility, implementation, equity, and innovation as they design their solution. This course is practical, highly interactive, and hands-on. Experts from non-profits, COA staff, and the local community will be involved in project planning and will participate in class sessions. Lectures will provide background material pertinent to the specific project. In addition to lectures/discussions and regular team meetings, there will be significant fieldwork (e.g., mapping, data collection, meetings with experts and community liaisons, charrettes, presentations, and collaboration with community partners). To enroll in the class, students need to possess the academic skills necessary to do independent, advanced work. A background in climate change, law, GIS, data analysis, planning, design, ecology, economics, business, social science research, or writing would be helpful. Physics and Mathematics of Sustainable Energy and Environmental Law and Policy are highly recommended. Students will be evaluated on the quality of their group work, participation in teams and class discussions, and quality of written and oral presentations. 

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: Advanced work at COA or at another college. Class limit: 16. Lab fee: $45."
"Real-world applications of data science can serve the public good and help students develop transferable skills. In this project-based course students will work collaboratively with community partners to collect, visualize, analyze, and communicate data for a term-long data science project. The projects identified by community partners may have long histories or be in their infancy and each will have different data needs and goals.

This course emphasizes putting knowledge into practice, including going beyond individual fields of study to solve real world problems and understand community partner needs. Students will build skills in project management, using agile methodologies and frequent meetings with community partners designed to foster co-development and iterative and incremental project delivery. Students will also develop and improve their communication of data analysis projects and build skills in reproducible analysis and collaboration using modern programming tools and techniques. In addition to developing their statistical and programming skills, students will build qualities valued by employers, such as teamwork, reproducible analysis, effective communication, independent thinking, and problem solving. 

This course is intended to appeal to a wide range of students and create an opportunity for students to do collaborative and advanced project work. Through the course, students will be exposed to a range of scientific ways of knowing and doing, helping students to cultivate an interdisciplinary perspective on what data science can do. Evaluation will be based on contributions to the process and final product of their team’s term-long community project, participation in skills workshops, and progress on their personal development plan.

Level: Intermediate Prerequisites: ES1085 Data Science I: Visualization.  Class limit: 16.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: QR."
"Climate change and biological diversity are prominent issues on the global political and environmental governance agendas and in public environmental consciousness. Each issue will be the focus of a major United Nations summit in 2020. Parties to the UN Convention on Biological Diversity will negotiate new post-2020 goals for halting biodiversity loss; parties to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change will see the launch of new commitments and a framework for action under the Paris Agreement. Meanwhile, public narratives of the escalating and intersecting dual “crises” of climate change and biodiversity loss provide a broader context for questioning the role and effectiveness of intergovernmental treaty regimes in addressing these crises.

This course will take a comparative and critical look at two multilateral treaty regimes: the UN Convention on Biological Diversity and the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change. Students will study legal characteristics of each of the treaties, how problems are defined and addressed within each, mechanisms used for implementation, and the governmental and non-governmental actors involved in the work of treaty implementation. We will also look at how these two treaty bodies work together to address issues at the intersection of climate change and biological diversity. Finally, we will spend some time in the course reading a range of theoretical perspectives and pondering larger political and philosophical questions: Are our current intergovernmental institutions up to the challenge of addressing these immense planetary challenges? What are the potentials of and limits to intergovernmental spaces and collective action that might we discern? What role might there be for non-governmental actors and social movements to contest and construct more effective regimes? How does a study of these regimes help us imagine what a global politics of the terrestrial might look like?

Students will be evaluated based on their participation in class discussions, regular writing assignments reflecting on course readings, a presentation related to one of the treaty regimes, and a final synthetic essay that engages with topics covered during the term.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced.  Prerequisites: Permission of instructor.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"This course examines the causes, extent, and ecological significance of the endangered species ""crisis.""  We examine the role of extinctions in evolutionary history and compare ""natural"" extinctions to current events in the Neotropics, Orient, and Oceania.  We also discuss the significance of successful introductions of exotic species into different regions and their effects on native forms.  Changes in land use patterns and the science of Landscape Ecology are investigated.  Finally, we examine current conservation techniques in an effort to establish a workable synthesis for specific case histories.  There are two lectures/discussions per week, occasional evening lectures.

Level: Advanced.  Pre-requisites: Any one of Ecology, Restoration Ecology, Environmental Law, Public Lands,  International Environmental Law or equivalent, or signature of instructor.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee $10.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES"
The student is studying at another institution under a financial aid consortium agreement.
"The fear of the “hidden” enemy that lurks behind the curtain, controlling events from the shadows, is a narrative topos that continually seems to raise its conspiratorial head in all kinds of spaces and venues: from politics to pop culture, movies, novels, music, political speeches,  etc.   Yet, there is also evidence to suggest that widespread acceptance of these conspiracy “theories” has the potential to cultivate and propagate inherently antidemocratic, divisive, and dangerous beliefs. Those who posit the existence of conspiracies, or at least certain ones, are often dismissed outright as irrational, without any consideration made as to the substance of their claims. Belief in conspiracies, or at least certain ones, is taken as a sign of faulty logic or reason.  Yet, despite this, conspiratorial explanations of various phenomenon actually have a long and vibrant history of popular acceptance in US political culture (as well as in other parts of the world). Some have gone so far as to suggest that narratives of conspiracy, as alternative or resistant explanatory frames, are actually a necessary component of democratic political life. After all we know that conspiracies, political and otherwise, have existed in the past, and may exist again in the future.  How do we make sense of this tension? If conspiracy theory as a mode of explanation is inherently “irrational,” what does this mean for its enduring presence in our political discourse? Is the only difference between a “reasonable” claim rooted in fear and what we consider the paranoid ramblings  of “kooks” and “nutjobs” simply a matter of which one is “correct?” Is there a silver bullet theory or magic wand that would allow us to differentiate the supposed good from the bad? Is the very act of labeling something a conspiracy theory itself a form of political hegemony? Even if conspiracies might exist, is it better to live in a world in which we  assume they don’t? What do we actually mean by conspiracy theory in the first place? This seminar will explore a variety of topics related directly to how threats of conspiracy become manifest in public discourse.  Readings will focus on secondary research that examines the role of conspiracy theories in political and social life, both in the United States and abroad. We will also supplement this with primary “artifacts” such as pamphlets, social media postings, videos, speeches, etc.   Along the way  we will also use this as an opportunity to reflect on what inter and trans disciplinary research actually looks like. The study of conspiracy narratives is an ideal example that helps us think about how different fields attempt to make sense of a phenomenon.   We will survey, compare, and attempt to synthesize research from a wide range of fields, disciplines and methodologies including those from historians, anthropologists, political scientists, legal scholars, literary critics,  psychologists, and others. This is an advanced seminar and students should expect to encounter readings that are rooted in disciplinary perspectives they are not familiar with. Students will need to adapt to shifting  perspectives in order to both the various texts  in conversation with each other.   Evaluation will be based on in-class discussion as well as individual student writing assignments. Students will produce several short length essay assignments during the term as well as a longer research paper at the end of the term. Weekly lab sessions will be used for screenings of primary material  and  students may also be responsible for at least one primary source presentation during these sessions. This class is open to students of all interests regardless of their experience with politics, government, or social theory.

Level: Advanced. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS."
"The fear of the ""hidden"" enemy that lurks behind the shadows is a narrative theme that appears periodically in the political discourse of all democratic societies. Yet, this narrative of fear (often labeled as conspiracy theory) is regularly criticized as somehow being inherently antidemocratic, irrational, or dangerous. At the same time, this form of argument can also be ""mainstreamed"" and defended as a legitimate response to the events of the moment. How do we make sense of this tension? If conspiracy theory as a mode of explanation is inherently ""irrational,"" what does this mean for its enduring presence in our political discourse?  Is the only difference between a reasonable claim rooted in fear and the conspiracy theories of ""kooks"" and ""nutjobs"" simply a matter of which one is ""correct?""   This class will address the role fear and anxiety plays in our social and political lives. We will explore a variety of topics related directly to how threats, conspiracies, agents of ""evil,"" and ""otherness"" become manifest in public discourse. Specific topics include:  the possible tension between ""rational"" deliberative decision making and the cultivating of anxiety in public governance; why we dismiss some claims as mere conspiracy theory and yet have no problem accepting other similarly formed arguments; what role the ""outsider"" plays in cementing cohesion within an ""in"" group; and the disturbing possibility that fear is actually a healthy component of democratic debate. The class will look at both contemporary and historical examples from the United States and around the world. There are three primary goals of the class: first, to expose students to the analysis of primary texts rooted in public fear and anxiety; second, to provoke discussion about the role of conspiracy and threats in democracies; and third, to provide students with a survey of secondary work that seeks to situate and make sense of these topics. Readings will be a combination of primary artifacts for interpretation (such a speeches, manifestos, pamphlets, and movies) as well as secondary analytical readings.  In addition to the regular class meeting time, students will be expected to attend a weekly evening lab session devoted to the screening of visual works and/or presentations by speakers.  Evaluation will be based on readings driven discussion as well as individual student writing assignments. Students will produce several short length essay assignments during the term as well as a longer research paper at the end of the term. This class is open to students of all interests regardless of their experience with politics, government, or social theory. 

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisites: none.  Class limit: 10.  Lab fee: none.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"This course on U.S. constitutional interpretation focuses on civil rights and liberties especially since the ""Due Process Revolution of the 1960s"" and will emphasize the Bill of Rights and the 14th Amendment using landmark Supreme Court decisions.  Topics include: speech, press, expressive conduct, religious liberty, race-based and gender-based discrimination, personal autonomy (such as privacy and right to die), and reproductive rights, marriage equality, and the rights of the accused.  With sufficient enrollment, all students will participate in a moot court (simulated Supreme Court) decision, arguing a case currently pending before the U.S. Supreme Court.  Student evaluation will be based upon written quizzes, short papers, case briefing (case summary writing), and the moot court decision (either a lawyer's brief or justice's opinion).  This course is appropriate for students interested in rights advocacy, rights activism, diversity studies, public policy, and legal studies.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: none. Class limit: 15. Lab fee: none. Meets the following degree requirements: HS."
"This introductory class in constitutional law will have one fundamental objective: understanding the current and historical role of the US Supreme Court in the recognition of civil and associated rights. The rights we will examine will include reproductive rights, freedom of speech in both the general and academic contexts, marriage equality, the rights of individuals in the transgender community, and racial equality. In order to understand these specific issues of Supreme Court doctrine, the class will begin with a review of how our courts function, how the doctrine of judicial review developed, and how to read and understand decisions of the Supreme Court. The question looming over the course will be whether the Supreme Court is a distinctive legal institution, an anti-democratic policy making body, or both – and whether this question can be resolved independent of our views on the underlying issues. The course will conclude with a “moot court” exercise in which students will play the role of either Supreme Court justices or lawyers appearing before the Supreme Court. The topic of the exercise will be drawn from a case or cases currently pending before the Supreme Court.

Assessment will be based on evidence that the student has completed assignments and readings, meaningful participation in seminar discussions, the preparation and presentation to the class of a summary of a judicial opinion under discussion, two short quizzes, and performance in the moot court exercise.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 15. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"Narrative: n. & adj.  N. a spoken or written account of connected events in order of happening. The practice or art of narration.  Adj. in the form of, or concerned with, narration (narrative verse).
How is meaning shaped by the images we create? In all cultures, throughout time, artists have sought ways to tell stories about far ranging topics -- the unknown, the success of a hunt, gods and goddesses, historical events, wars, court tales, biblical themes, social instruction, morals, politics, product promotion, and personal imaginings.  Historically, artists have adapted visual story telling techniques to exploit evolving technology and changing social concerns, from ancient wall markings, tomb inscriptions, scrolls, illuminated manuscripts, pottery decoration, carved totems, pictorial painting, to sequential engraved prints, comic books, graphic novels, graffiti and the web. In this studio course, students will investigate ""visual language"", symbolism, and some of the pictorial devices, materials, and techniques employed by artists to tell stories visually -particularly through sequential composition in the graphic arts. 

Through focused assignments, discussion of artists' works (historic and across cultures), and guided demonstrations in a variety of materials and techniques, students will respond to select historic forms of visual narrative to create unique contemporary forms in which to tell their own relevant stories. ""Case Study"" studio projects will be selected to focus on key points in world history that mark technological transition in material, technique and pictorial devices employed by artists to render visual narratives.  Projects will range from the hands-on exploration of ancient wall painting and low relief carving technique, through non-press printing techniques such as linocut, image transfer, and potato prints, to collage of found images, xerography, Polaroid print manipulation, digital prints and ""synthetic"" imaging on the computer. Students will be encouraged to explore and invent new forms of sequential composition and utilize new or previously unexplored materials or techniques.  Concurrent investigations in visual studies will focus on the meaning created through the use of pictorial devices, signs and symbols, and the creation of narrative structure through repeated image/duplication, sequential composition, and visual allegory. Students will be evaluated on writing assignments, level of completion and analysis of assigned readings, research and presentation, quality and completion of projects, and participation in class activities and discussion. There are no prerequisites, however, the following courses are recommended: Intro to Arts and Design, or 2D courses in drawing, painting, printmaking, or graphic design, photography, or writing and/or literature courses.

Level: Introductory/intermediate.  Prerequisites: none.  Class Limit: 15.  Lab Fee: $85.   Meets the following degree requirements: ADS"
"This studio course invites students to explore the influence of contemplative practices on their existing or emerging art practice. We will engage contemplation in our art practice as both specific rituals like meditation that generate an art work or, creating a work that seeks to create a state of reflection on our interconnected place in the world. Methods of contemplation will come primarily from Zen and Creativity by John Daido Loori, The Illuminated Space: A Personal Theory & Contemplative Practice of Media Art by Marilyn Freeman, and The Artist's Way by Julia Cameron. These and other readings will be supported by in-class exercises and examples of contemporary art engaging similar themes. Time will be spent each class in meditation to connect body and mind before engaging with artwork. Students working across various mediums are welcome, while the artists' work shown in class will focus on moving image and sound, with some work from installation, performance, and photography based on student interest. Students will receive prompts each week to create their own work which will then be shared in-class; culminating in the exhibition of a final project. Evaluation will be based on completion of assignments and active in-class engagement with course material. 

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: Previous studio art course. Previous classes in filmmaking or photography are encouraged but not required.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $30.  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS."
"The student will be introduced to a contemporary stream of visual culture that places nature, ethos, competing ideologies, and our relationship to these within the context of emergent forms of art activism. In response to environmental and social crisis, theory and praxis figure significantly in the work of artists and artist collectives from around the globe whose practice manifests as socially engaged art (SEA) defined by Pablo Helguera; data/information reimagined as by Mona Hatoum and Trevor Paglen; or examinations of reconciliation and mass trauma in the work of Doris Salcedo and Kara Walker. In some cases, artworks engage with nature/culture by their placement in site-specific locations, through new modes of picturing, and/or through the appropriation of hypothetical scientific musings or emerging technologies (e.g., Ed Atkins, fictionalized genetic hybridization and subversion of surveillance tools). Many of the artists we examine make use of new tools designed for industrial purpose, medical, agricultural, or scientific research. Others further participatory dialogues within anti-racist, de-colonizing, and queer-centred discursive practices. This work is inherently transdisciplinary and human ecological in disposition and character. Many of these producer-artists appropriate the role of “researcher” in order to bring attention to ecologies that human beings have disrupted or will disrupt. Doris Salcedo, Tacita Dean, Kara Walker, Mark Dion, Shirin Neshat, Ai Weiwei, Andra Ursuta, Karim Ben Khelifa, Raven Chacon, Frances Alys, Natalie Jeremijenko, Guillermo Galindo, among others, will be considered. Evaluation is based on class participation, evidence of completion of weekly readings, a final paper, and a class presentation. 

Level: Introductory/Intermediate.  Prerequisites: none.  Lab fee: $50.  Class limit: 15. Meets the following degree requirements: AD HY"
"This literature course allows students to explore the rich world of modern and contemporary black writers. The texts will include those from the US and beyond, in an attempt to sample the wide range of fabulous prose authors (primarily novelists and essayists) that speak from and about the experiences of a significant segment of the world’s population. Similarities and differences between prose styles and narrative focus will allow us to probe aesthetic and linguistic as well as cultural and historical phenomena and contexts. While the emphasis will be on works written since 2000, we will begin the term by reading a few 20th century authors who paved the way for the artistry which was to follow — choosing among writers such as Ann Petry, Gwendolyn Brooks, Octavia Butler and James Baldwin from the US and Chinua Achebe, Bessie Head, and Ama Ata Aidoo from the African continent. Earlier selections will set us up with questions about the fiction and prose literary articulation coming from both post-slavery and post-colonial contexts. The remainder of the term we will read 21st century works by authors such as Chimamanda Ngozi Adichi, Colson Whitehead, Ta-nehisi Coates, Yaa Gyasi, Zadie Smith, Jessmyn Ward, and Nnedi Okorafor. Students will be evaluated on class participation, shared discussion leading responsibilities, and written work. Each student will choose one of three options for written work: four 2-3 page critical analyses; two 5-7 page studies of a particular work or theme; or a 12-15 page extended analysis of one or two works or authors. 

Level: Intermediate/Advanced.  Prerequisites: A previous literature, history, or post-colonial course and permission of instructor.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"This introductory course will focus on personal expression through movement and compositional techniques. Each class will begin with a gentle warm up that will help students become aware of movement impulses and locate a personal movement vocabulary. Through short, weekly assignments, students will gather a collection of tools for composing movement sequences including honing improvisation toward set choreography, responding to spatial and environmental conditions, and drawing inspiration from sound and imagery. Our making will be supplemented by readings and screenings of 20th and 21st century choreographers, aiding us in contextualizing our creative process within the current field of contemporary dance. Students will be asked to craft a short final piece of choreography, to be shared with the community during a ""Works in Progress"" showing. Evaluation will be based on attendance, satisfactory completion of weekly assignments, and rigorous engagement with the process of developing a final piece. Students of diverse abilities and experiences are encouraged to enroll. It is strongly recommended that students have some prior dance or theater coursework before taking this course. Please contact the instructor directly if you have questions about your background.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $0. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"This course selects from among the most interesting, diverse and well-written of contemporary women's fiction to focus on questions of women's writing (and how/whether it can be treated as a literary and formal category), gender identity and women's issues, and the tension between sameness and difference among women's experiences, and narrations of women's experience, around the world.  The course begins by examining two relatively unknown yet rather extraordinary novels from earlier in the twentieth century:  Alexandra Kollantai's Love of Worker Bees (1927) and Sawako Ariyoshi's The Doctor's Wife (1967).  After these, we read from truly contemporary authors and quite varied authors published within the last twenty years, like Buchi Emecheta, Gloria Naylor, Ursula Hegi, Nawal El Saadawi, Sue Grafton, Graciela Limon, Tsitsi Dargarembga, Barara Yoshimoto, Dorothy Allison, Rose Tremain, Julia Alvarez, Leslie Feinberg, April Sinclair, and Achy Obejas.  Students each choose an additional author to study and read a novel outside of class.  An extensive list of authors is included in the syllabus. Evaluation be based on class participation, either two short papers or one long paper on works discussed in class, a presentation to the class of the outside novel, and a final evaluation essay.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced.  Prerequisite: a previous literature course and signature of the instructor.  Offered every other year.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"This course introduces students to the study of political economy from a Marxian perspective. Unlike economics which focuses on various parts of the economy, whether at the micro- or macro- level, political economy focuses on the intertwining of power and money, or how politics affects the economic system and how the economy in turn shapes politics. As most of the world now lives with variants of the capitalist economic system, we will devote our time to understand the structure of capitalism, its functioning logics, as well as its contradictions and malfunctions. We will do so by engaging with Karl Marx’s original writings, which to this day still constitute one of the most fundamental and insightful critiques of the capitalist economic system. Marx’s Capital, Volume One will be both our guiding posts and a useful entry point for thinking about a wide range of issues, including labor and value, commodification and consumption fetishization, capital accumulation and growth, the role of the state in political economic processes, and the ongoing violence of accumulation.

As Eric Wolf, the late anthropologist, has noted, “the social sciences constitute one long dialogue with the ghost of Marx” (Europe and the People without History, 1982). Rather than being Marx’s disciples, we strive to be his interlocutor. As such, in addition to selections from Marx’s key works, we also read current Marxian political economy scholarship that draws on, critiques, and pushes its boundaries. Upon completion of this course, you will have developed practices of thinking critically and imaginatively about capitalism’s fundamental drives, uneven development, insatiable appetite for technological innovation, and tendency towards violent expansion. You will also be attuned to the need to contextualize contemporary debates regarding capitalism in its transnational, raced, and gendered dimensions.

The course is valuable for any students who want to better articulate the conditions of living under capitalism, or to cultivate a political imagination about the future of capitalist economic systems. Previous knowledge in economics is not necessary, but students must have an appetite for reading and parsing out complex, abstract texts. Prior exposure to Marxist theories or critical theories can be helpful. Students will be evaluated through bi-weekly reading reviews (approximately 3-5 pages of critical reflection based on assigned readings) and a final research proposal to investigate a socioeconomic issue of your choice. 

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS."
"This course explores the rich history of capitalism through the lens of two of the most ubiquitous and valuable crops in the world: corn and coffee.  The crops provide insight into the global and local dimensions of both historical and contemporary reality in the countries where they are grown with a focus on Guatemala, Mexico, and the United States.  Corn and coffee provide a convenient vantage point from which to examine the social, economic, and cultural dynamics of community-based production of both crops on the one hand and their globally-connected production as commodities. The course moves from a broad macro perspective on each crop to an intensive exploration of how both are produced in Guatemala.  In this way, class participants will be able to look at how global historical trends in consumption have played themselves out in local communities.  The class will simultaneously be able to look at the processes at work in pueblos throughout Guatemala that root the corn economy into rich cultural and social dynamics that are at the core of communal life.  Using these two crops as a starting point, the class will allow students to develop a holistic and synthetic understanding of how global food systems land in places. The course emphasizes attention to the broad global dimensions of corn and coffee's production as well as the fine-grained study of Guatemala's socio-cultural life in historical and anthropological perspective. Through discussions of the books, this seminar-style course seeks to provide students with deep insights into the history of a specific place while maintaining a sense of the global and regional context.  Intensive readings will provide students with a snapshot of trends in both history and ethnography while broader synthetic analyses of both corn and coffee will embody more popular approaches to the topic.  Students will lead discussions of the readings, write short synthetic essays, and undertake a research project for the class. Evaluation will be based on short writing, course participation and the final project.

Level: Advanced. Prerequisites: None. Class Limit: 12. Lab fee: $50. Meets the following degree requirements: HS HY"
"Through the course Craft Ecologies, students will trace the complex systems which bring material into being. Exploring the natural substances of Mount Desert Island, students will harvest raw materials, think through material as an extension of place, and create process-based artworks. In this studio seminar, we will consider the correspondence between maker and material. Wild clay, natural pigments, and foraged fibers will enter contemporary art discourse as students explore entanglements between the natural and human-built worlds. Coursework will include a term-long self-designed project related to course themes. We will also undertake weekly reading assignments such as Robin Wall Kimmerer’s Braiding Sweetgrass, Ursula Le Guin’s Carrier Bag Theory of Fiction, and Tim Ingold’s Making. Students will be evaluated based on their participation in class discussions and critiques, as well as their inventiveness and demonstrated effort in ceramic assignments. 

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: At least one arts and design studio course in any discipline. Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $30. Meets the following degree requirements: ADS."
"Art video and film have long traditions as vehicles for self-expression, abstraction, self-portraiture, and experimentation.  Artists have utilized motion pictures as a studio-based practice and as an extension of performance, painting, writing, drawing, and the body.  Whether the results are abstract, experimental, essay, found footage or diary, these works can be highly independent, creative works of art.  In this course, students will follow prompts and assignments to make short works exploring some of these possibilities.  Students will read critical essays and artists’ statements addressing film as art, and study related films and videos. Students will be asked to research and present on a film/video artist. Students will be evaluated based on the completion of assignments and participation in discussions and peer critiques. 

Level: Introductory/Intermediate.  Prerequisites: Previous coursework in photography, drawing, painting or design. Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $30.  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS"
"In this workshop, students will have the opportunity to experiment with style, form and voice in the genre of literary nonfiction, all while working toward a lively final piece. The course will center around three short creative nonfiction projects, all driven by your individual interests and experiences. The two initial projects—a personal essay/memoir and a piece of nontraditional cultural criticism—will inform the final one, modeled after the irreverent and highly subjective New York Times “Letters of Recommendation” feature, which places autobiographical anecdote within a larger cultural context. We will read short examples of each kind of essay but the bulk of the class would be developing and workshopping students’ own work. Students will be guided toward finding meaningful, unusual topics that suit their own passions, and will be given instruction in the foundations of good prose writing, including grammatical style, diction, structure and revision strategies, all of which are useful skills for composition and creative writing in general.

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites:  Experience in writing creative and academic prose; familiarity and comfort with the writing workshop model.  Class limit: 12. Lab fee: None"
"The concept of taking Beyoncé and Stranger Things as seriously as one takes Mozart and Shakespeare has long been upheld by the discipline of cultural studies, but it remains controversial, even within some segments of the academy. And writing about such things through the relatively new genre of creative nonfiction is even more ground-breaking. In this creative nonfiction seminar, we’ll explore how to think in scholarly but also deeply personal ways about popular culture, and how to channel that into literary nonfiction writing. Texts may include ""Go Ahead in the Rain: Notes to A Tribe Called Quest"" by Hanif Abdurraqib, Khadijah Queen’s ""I’m So Fine"", the University of Texas’ Music Matters series, and work by Roland Barthes, Wayne Koestenbaum and others. Students will work on individual creative writing projects and writing will be workshopped and revised throughout the term. Although there are no specific prerequisites, the course will require independent research and will be conducted at an intermediate or advanced level best-suited for students with experience in academic research, literary analysis and creative writing. Students will be evaluated based on quality of completed assignments, both creative and academic, and participation in class discussion.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced.  Prerequisites: Experience and skills in academic research, literary analysis and creative writing.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: none."
"This is a course for critically engaging with technology through making and theory. Starting from Marshall McLuhan’s seminal analysis of the ways media configure the human sensorium, we will build on sound and moving image to explore the ways computation operates on levels above or beyond human perception. We will draw from new media art, politics, and media theory to engage with technology by focusing on computation as media, medium, and material for artistic production and critique. Through readings, in-class projects, and semester-long critical making projects, we will engage with the history and practice of critical making with a focus on the production of generative new media projects using the software program Max/MSP. Beginning with an overview of media theoretical concepts like mediation, representation, image, embodiment and information, the course will focus on discourses relevant to new media practice today, including algorithms, race, platforms, and artificial intelligence. The aim of this course is to develop a critical technical practice that takes seriously the politics embedded within our contemporary media systems by focusing on the ways computation is interwoven into everyday experience.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: Some programming and/or artmaking experience is helpful, but not required. Class limit: 15. Lab fee: $60."
"This course focuses on the ecological and evolutionary consequences of associations formed between organisms that are markedly different in form and function.  A diverse array of interactions ranging from pollination and termite digestion to hitch-hiking mites are examined in order to explore the role of symbioses in biological systems.  In this context we explore the changing conceptions of the major divisions of life; current models for explaining the origin of eukaryotes, angiosperms, and two-sex systems; coevolution; keystone species, and models for assessing mutualism and parasitism within an ecological context.  Evaluations are based on ability to read and critique primary scientific literature, class participation, and the completion of a term project.  

Level: Intermediate/Advanced.  Prerequisite:  Biology I and II and Ecology.  Class limit: 15.  Lab Fee: $25.00.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES"
"This is an intermediate/advanced course in which students will explore in depth the connections between and among modern and cross-cultural women's novels, primarily those written in the now very multi-cultural United States.  We will strive to make connections between texts so as to better understand the nature of and any patterns or themes that shape women's and cross-cultural fictional narration.  Historical perspective, cultural differences, and gender roles will all be taken into consideration as we analyze relatively recent women's fiction by such authors such as Toni Morrison, Maxine Hong Kingston, Gloria Naylor, Linda Hogan, Julie Shikeguni,  Jamaica Kincaid, Nora Okja Keller, Cristina Garcia, Jhumpa Lahiri, and Sigrid Nunez.  Participants will read carefully, prepare and ask questions of each other, write frequent response papers, and carry out a sustained independent project to be presented to the group.  The outside project will focus on one or more additional texts that may be fictional, theoretical, cultural, or historic. The group presentation will put outside texts into broad cultural and historical perspectives and/or discuss them in terms of trends in women's literature, immigrant literature, women's literature of the United States, multicultural narratives, or some other course theme.  Selection of the outside text will give participants the opportunity to fill in perceived gaps in their reading or explore a particular narrative or cultural form in depth.  The reading load for this course is relatively heavy.  Evaluation will focus on preparation, participation, insight, critical thinking, response papers, and the outside project - both its oral presentation and development in an appropriate form (visual, narrative, analytic, curricular, etc.). 

Level: Intermediate/Advanced.  Prerequisites: a previous literature course; Contemporary Women's Novels experience recommended.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: none. Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"This course is designed for students planning to teach in schools whether in Maine or outside of the United States. Culturally sustaining/revitalizing education (CSRE) builds on the aims, values, insights, and practices of anti-racist education, culturally relevant pedagogy, culturally responsive teaching, culturally sustaining/revitalizing pedagogy, decolonizing education, global education, intercultural education, and multicultural education. In particular, it aims to contextualize education in the history of colonization, land theft, slavery, the continued struggle for sovereignty and self-determination of native tribes and First Nations, and calls for wider community accountability. This educational approach challenges deficit mindsets and structures that undergird policies and practices that widen the opportunity gap and equitable access to basic human and civil rights and impede educational access for sustaining and revitalizing cultures that settler colonialism has attempted to eliminate, assimilate, or marginalize. Students will practice asset-based and growth mindsets to gain an understanding of the relationship between CSRE and respect for tribal sovereignty and support of contemporary struggles for tribal continuity and resistance to cultural genocide and epistemicide. The course also opens a dialogue on the applicability of CRSE for immigrant, refugee, and asylum-seeking students whose relationship to their new place of residence may be tenuous at best and whose heritage languages and cultures are also endangered as a result of first- to second-generation assimilation in their adopted communities. Students will gain an understanding of conceptual frameworks, knowledge of empirical studies documenting outcomes and impacts of these approaches, and skills in ethically and effectively teaching indigenous, immigrant, and other culturally and linguistically diverse learners. For students seeking Maine teaching endorsements, this course will prepare them to implement LD291 requiring Maine educators to teach Wabanaki history and culture. Students will learn through field trips, guest speakers, films, discussions, critical exploration and reflection, independent research, observation/fieldwork/practicum, and peer teaching. Evaluation will include artifacts to be incorporated into a teaching portfolio: a lesson plan, teaching video, self-assessment, assessment of PK-12 student work, and communication with families and community members. Although there are no prerequisites, the following are recommended; Learning and/or proficiency in a language other than English; a psychology, sociology, or anthropology course; and/or a prior education course. 

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisite: None. Class limit: 15. Lab fee: $25. Meets the following degree requirements: ED, HS."
"From ""cabinet of curiosity"" to ""exploratorium"", this studio course surveys contemporary museum activities and methods of communication through visual display, space, and interaction.  Students will engage in a project-development process to refine ""big ideas"", determine educational goals, and learn techniques to design and build their projects. Class participants will gain an understanding of factors that influence learning, media and modes that may be utilized to communicate complex content, and how meaning is constructed by the selection, organization and layering of intellectual material through the use of object, text, image, and experiential devices.

Projects and hands-on workshops will provide an opportunity to gain skills and techniques in visualizing ideas by developing concepts in the form of plans, sketches, models, and narrative description. Students will have an opportunity to evaluate and create interpretive material for the George B. Dorr Natural History Museum at the College of the Atlantic. Students will be evaluated through participation in class discussion and critiques, attendance, and for completion and quality of assigned projects.  This course is appropriate for all students interested in informal education in the museum environment, design, and visual communication.

Level: Introductory/intermediate. Prerequisite: One or more courses in Arts and Design OR Educational Studies. Class limit: 15.  Lab Fee: $85  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS"
"This course explores the nature of current developments in artificial intelligence and how they present challenges and opportunities in ways they are transforming the world. We will adopt a broad definition of AI that includes everything from simple thermostats to the most advanced machine learning systems and we will look at ways these are altering life processes in the natural world and institutions throughout society. 
 
Course goals are: 1.) to advance understandings of different programming principles, research and development strategies and underlying philosophical assumptions guiding development in such technologies; 2.) to develop abilities to use interdisciplinary[, problem centered approaches to understand the distinctions between complicated and wicked problems associated with rapid technological change in this area and key approaches to dealing with them; 2.) to cultivate skills in working collaboratively on problem-centered studies as well as programming projects that deal with AI in areas of student interest, 4.) to develop meta-cognitive abilities to learn these kinds of material in groups as well as on your own.  
       
A major part of the course for each student will be a term project which can be pursued either individually or collaboratively. It may take a variety of forms including, for instance: 1.) a ?F?utures ?S?tudies investigation using methods of historical and/or social science research culminating in a report on some emerging, AI-related social or environmental concern;  2.) a computer programming project that solves a practical problem, is conducive to artistic expression, performs scientific analysis of quantitative data, or demonstrates an established or experimental feature of an ML or otherwise AI system; 3.)  a philosophical and/or theoretical critical analysis of underlying concepts, values or assumptions that are at stake in the emerging AI technologies. 
       
Readings will include some classic texts in AI theory, philosophy, and futures studies as well as selections from standard texts on AI programming. We will also use podcasts, films, and other media to pursue key topics and trends. There will be a series of short programming activities to study basic principles and try modeling aspects of more complicated and/or complex systems. These will be done, at least initially, in block coding which will be accessible to students without any previous programming experience and which allows people to see how this translates into other languages such as C or Python.[ We will examine the ways in which they can be coded in Python and students familiar with that or other languages will be able to pursue homework and final project work in whatever language they may prefer. We will also explore methods of prompt engineering for working with emerging systems that have dialogical interfaces. 
 
The course will include two weekly class sessions as well as a lab. Class sessions will vary in format from extended discussion of texts and problems to supplementary lecture, visiting speaker, collaborative coding activities and extended project work. The class as a group will develop at least one major hackathon style project as a way of exploring key issues and developing key skills.  
       
Evaluation will be based on the extent to which students demonstrate in homework, class participation and individual projects that they have advanced in each of the four main goals for the course. 

This class will be especially well suited for students who want to continue computer assisted research, art work, coding or other projects they previously explored in other classes.

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: $35.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS."
"Human ecologists who educate, embrace not only the interdisciplinarity of knowledge, but also the complexity of individual student development in political school environments.  This course focuses on two essential nuts and bolts of teaching: curriculum design and assessment.  How can a teacher learn what students know, how they think, and what they have learned?  How can a teacher use this knowledge of students and subject matter to plan learning experiences that will engage diverse interests, adapt to a wide range of learning styles and preferences, accommodate exceptional needs, and meet state-mandated curriculum standards?  This course is a required course for prospective secondary school teachers that provides an introduction to the backward design process and diverse assessment strategies.  Students will engage in examining theory and practice designing and implementing curricula and assessments. A service-learning component will provide students with the opportunity to observe and participate in a variety of assessment methods in the subject they aim to teach.  The final project will be a collaboratively designed, integrated curriculum unit, including lesson plans and assessments.   Evaluation will be based on participation, reflective writing, individually designed lesson plans and assessments, and the final project.

Level: Advanced. Prerequisite: Supporting Students with Disabilities in the Regular Classroom. Class Limit: 12. Lab Fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: HS ED"
"Students will learn basic concepts in statistical programming and graphics in R. Topics include formatting, loading and manipulating data; plotting data; hypothesis testing; and basics of linear and generalized linear models. All examples used in learning are tailored to the needs of students and professionals in ecology, wildlife biology, and related fields. Prerequisites: Introductory statistics. No prior experience using R is necessary."
"Microplastic pollution has garnered much attention in recent years, yet much is still unknown regarding the extent and threat posed by this pollutant. We will review the recent and seminal literature focusing on the distribution of plastic pollution and the negative effects on the environment. Our goal is to build a strong foundation of knowledge about this emerging field and recognize the current gaps in understanding its effects on wildlife. Although this is not a laboratory class, methods and materials on how to sample, isolate, and quantify microplastic pollution in various samples will be reviewed and demonstrated for researchers interested in collecting measurements in the field."
"Scent detection dogs are increasingly being used in a variety of situations, from law enforcement to medicine. Their recent application in field programs is seen as a way to enhance conservation research success by improving the frequency or probability of finding focal organisms, including rare or cryptic species. This course uses a case-study approach featuring an ongoing field-based project as a means to introduce participants to some of the practical issues, considerations, and benefits of using tracking dogs in conservation. Taught by three instructors with complementary expertise, this course explores the intersection of field methodology, animal training, and the natural history of a target species. Participants will learn about field methods in herpetology, practical considerations of canine temperament and training, and discuss real-life study logistics in an online platform. Participants will gain a unique insight into what is involved in using scent detection dogs as well as the potential benefits of this approach."
"Scent detection dogs are increasingly being used in a variety of situations, from law enforcement to medicine. Their recent application in field programs is seen as a way to enhance conservation research success by improving the frequency or probability of finding focal organisms, including rare or cryptic species. This course uses a case-study approach featuring an ongoing field-based project as a means to introduce participants to some of the practical issues, considerations, and benefits of using tracking dogs in conservation. Taught by three instructors with complementary expertise, this course explores the intersection of field methodology, animal training, and the natural history of a target species. Participants will learn about field methods in herpetology, practical considerations of canine temperament and training, and discuss real-life study logistics in an online platform. Participants will gain a unique insight into what is involved in using scent detection dogs as well as the potential benefits of this approach. This course concludes with a 1-week field component, which consists of in-person observations of research methods, training, and tracking in the field."
"In this intermediate-level dance course, we will work as an ensemble of movers to build improvisational scores, deepen our sense of listening, and think critically about improvisation as a practice of choice-making, communication, and resilience. Each class session will take the form of an ensemble rehearsal, beginning with a gentle warm-up that drops dancers into their sensory awareness. Once we are prepared to move safely, we will experiment with scores and prompts that generate movement and debrief our experiences through writing, drawing, and discussion. Opportunities will be provided to explore more specific microcosms of dance improvisation including musical collaborations, Contact Improvisation, and Emergent Improvisation. Short readings and video screenings will complement our embodied learning. We will develop an evening-length performance as our final project, to be performed on campus and at local schools. Students will be assessed based on attendance, participation in discussions, presence in rehearsals, and participation in our final performance. 

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: Prior theater and/or dance coursework is strongly encourage but not required.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $30.  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS."
"Data Science is an interdisciplinary field that encompasses data exploration, statistical modeling, and visualization. Data Science has broad applicability to the natural and social sciences and can be used to guide health and policy decisions. Students interested in analyzing data from the natural or social sciences should take this course. Students who complete this course will be able to: 1. organize data to be correctly read by computer software; 2. subset, transform and summarize data to understand its structure; 3. explore relationships in data through creative visualization; 4. ask questions of the data by fitting the appropriate statistical models; and 5. produce clear and convincing visualizations that support major conclusions from the data.

Most classes will be taught through live coding exercises in which students will write code simultaneously with the instructor. The course will emphasize rigorous practices that lead to reproducible research by scripting analyses and versioning of data and results. Students will be encouraged to bring data from their own interests to the class. Students who do not have data will be able to select from several data sets from the social and physical sciences. Examples of data sets might be: temperature change over time, animal population data, election results or wage and income data. No prior programming experience is required. Students will need to use either their personal laptop or a COA loaner laptop for class and programming exercises. Evaluation will be through class participation, quizzes, homework and a final project.

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES, QR"
"How can one summarize information and data and convey its meaning to others? What is an effective data visualization? What is an ineffective or dishonest one? And, for that matter, what is data? This course will explore these questions by introducing students to the broad field of information visualization. Students will learn about different types of visualizations that may be used to explore variation and covariation, the evolution of processes through time and space, and representing parts of a whole. Much of the work of this course will be carried out using computers and the R programming language, but we will also explore non-computational approaches to visualization. Students will develop skills in data collection, data cleaning, and creating different types of data visualizations (e.g. bar charts, scatter plots, density plots, heat maps, violin plots, time series, and interactive graphics) and effective data communication while working on problems and case studies inspired by and based on real-world questions. We will also critique and reflect upon data visualizations in our daily lives. Students will also gain familiarity with descriptive statistics and ways to organize and summarize categorical and numerical data to pick out key information.  

This course is designed to serve as an introduction to programming in R. Students will learn to gain insight from data, to use literate programming and version control so that these insights are reproducible by others, and to develop code collaboratively. Students who successfully complete this course will be able to work with large data sets, transform those data, and implement effective visualizations. Throughout the course we will be using GitHub, ggplot2, Rmarkdown, gganimate, RShiny and the tidyverse packages for data manipulation. This course is intended to appeal to a wide range of students. The skills and habits of mind taught in this course are applicable not only in the sciences and social sciences, but in almost all fields. Evaluation will be based on several short homework and lab assignments, participation in in-class activities, and a final project.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 16.  Lab fee: none. Meets the following degree requirements: QR"
"This course is a continuation of Data Science I. Publicly available data is often of great use, but is rarely offered in ready-to-use formats and requires “data wrangling” before it is ready to be analyzed. We will begin with advanced data wrangling of publicly available data from the social and natural sciences. We will then progress to critical evaluation of the data and develop the skills to generate reproducible analysis reports. Students interested in analyzing data from the social or natural sciences should take this course. Students who complete this course will be able to:
1. perform advanced data wrangling of publicly available data sets,
2. build custom functions to streamline data analysis,
3. perform simulations to explore how small changes in variables affect the results,
4. make code used for data analysis publicly available,
5. produce a final report that integrates explanatory text with computer code that transforms data, fits models to the data and visualizes the results.

The course will emphasize rigorous practices that lead to reproducible research through scripting of analyses and versioning of data and results. The course examples will use publicly available data. Students will be encouraged to bring data from their own research to the class. Students who do not have data will be able to select from several data sets from the social and physical sciences. Students will need to use either their personal laptop or a COA loaner laptop for class and programming exercises. Evaluation will be through class participation, quizzes, homework and a final project.

Level: Intermediate:  Prerequisites: Data Science I.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: none.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES, QR"
"Continuing on the themes explored in Data Science 1, students will go beyond data visualization to gain insight from data using statistical and machine learning techniques. Students who successfully complete this course will be able to work with large data sets, transform those data, and apply statistical and machine learning techniques to analyze data. Students will build on their knowledge of GitHub, ggplot2, Rmarkdown, and the tidyverse packages for data manipulation, visualization and analysis, to include an analytical toolkit for answering different types of questions and working with different types of data. Students will be exposed to a variety of topics including: webscraping, generalized linear models, machine learning, and text analysis. We will also explore rotating advanced special topics in data science (e.g. image processing, spatial analysis).

This course is intended to appeal to a wide range of students. The skills and habits of mind taught in this course are applicable not only in the sciences and social sciences, but in almost all fields. Evaluation will be based on several short homework and lab assignments, participation in in-class activities, and a final project.

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: Data Science I: Visualization. Class limit: 16. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: QR."
"Most of the ocean is deep, dark, and cold – conditions that at first glance appear terribly inhospitable. And yet the past century and a half of deep-ocean exploration has revealed an astonishing abundance and diversity of life, with forms and functions that, though seemingly alien, reflect exquisite adaptation to the unique challenges of surviving in such an environment. Our expanding knowledge about the deep ocean is only possible with the boundary-pushing technologies and instruments developed to delve deeper, see further, and collect more from the most remote depths. As we have learned more about the ecosystems in the deep ocean, it has also become clear that human activities are not so removed from them as we once believed. Discussions about deep ocean biology now include debates about our obligation to protect and conserve it.

In this course, we will take a tour of the variety of life that exists in the deep ocean, learn about how we observe and study it, and discuss the ways that humans interact with and affect it. Our guiding questions for the course are:

What kinds of life exist in different deep ocean ecosystems?
How are deep sea organisms adapted to life in an environment of extremes?
What technologies are used to study life in the deep ocean and what are their capabilities and constraints?
What do we owe to life in the deep ocean in terms of conservation?
What do we owe to human society in terms of deep-ocean exploration, discovery, and resource use?

We meet twice a week in class and have one afternoon lab period. Classes are a combination of lecture, discussion and activities, and labs focus on one or two elements of deep-sea biology for deeper investigation as a group. This course is open to anyone but is particularly suited for students interested in marine studies, ecology, evolutionary biology, and/or environmental ethics. Students will be assessed based on short research assignments throughout the course and a term project. 

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 14.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES."
"Across a range of epochs, cultures, and territories, human beings have proffered myths, stories, and scientific theories in order to explain catastrophic natural events. From kata=down, strephein=turn, the Greek katastrephein meant ""under-turning"" in the ancient world. This course explores postulations regarding large- and small-scale calamitous events that seem to originate from below the surface of Earth. Our enquiry engages with legendary tales, historical records, material culture and scientific discourses that document attempts to explain the meaning and/or mechanism of such memorable episodes. What causes a mountain to eject ash and toxic gases? What infernal force creates lava flow? Why does the earth shake? Why do some natural waters cause harm? How do we understand that which we cannot see? Through case-studies informed by the literature of science, the arts and humanities, we will plumb the depths and limits of the human imagination. This class uses both a lecture-based and seminar-style discussion approach as well as time spent visiting local lab and field sites. Students will be evaluated based on their weekly activities and writing assignments, and a final project with both oral and written presentation components.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced.  Prerequisites: At least one previous class in either art history or literature is required; an additional class in, or knowledge of, geoscience is strongly suggested. Permission of instructor.   Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: none.  Meets the following degree requirements: HY"
"Algerian Jewish philosopher, Jacques Derrida (1930-2004), one of the most widely translated French philosophers of the 20th century, developed a body of work often referred to as ""deconstruction."" Derrida’s oeuvre has influenced multiple fields and disciplines, including Literature, Anthropology, Philosophy, Postcolonial Studies, Psychoanalysis and Feminist Theory. This course will track some of the ways in which Derrida engaged with ideas of difference, through a focus on questions his work poses for understandings of the human. The class will engage with Derrida’s archive through reading some of his early work, including essays and interviews about the status of writing and speech, language, and philosophy, and then move through his later work, including his increasing focus on explicitly political topics such as the death penalty, the animal, sovereignty, and war. Although the texts we read will be primarily Derrida’s own writing, we will also read authors who respond to and build on Derrida’s thought. These may include Gayatri Spivak, Ranjana Khanna, Samir Haddad, Peggy Kamuf, and Michael Naas, as well as texts by those with whom Derrida was in dialogue, such as Sigmund Freud, Hélène Cixous, Michel Foucault, Sarah Kofman, Claude Lévi-Strauss, Karl Marx, Martin Heidegger and Emmanuel Levinas. As we move through Derrida’s texts and those informed by them, we will pay particular attention to questions about sexual difference, colonialism, the human, death in relation to life, and representation. Students will be evaluated on participation in seminar discussions, weekly reading responses, a mid-term paper and final paper. There are no prerequisites for this course, but students will be expected to conduct close readings of challenging texts. Students are encouraged to contact the professor with any questions about the course and whether it is a good fit for them. 

Level: Intermediate/Advanced.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $10.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"Participants in this studio course will examine the CoA campus path system from the standpoint of mobility, access, and landscape narrative. We will examine the path system as it exists as a physical artifact and the access and safety challenges associated with it (abrupt grade changes, inadequate lighting, etc.). We will also conduct research to uncover stories about the landscape history and landscape spaces on campus that might be curated to tell a rich story about this unique place, how it transformed over time, the ecology and biotic communities that are present, and some of the forces that might affect its future (climate change for example). Student teams will be led through a process to develop visions for the future of the campus path system, building on what already exists, and that synthesize technical parameters (associated with improved access through regrading for example) and qualitative and experiential dimensions of the path network experience. The goal will be to utilize these design visions to inform a campus-wide conversation as to what a better functioning, more equitable and more indelibly memorable campus path system could look like and be achieved. Given the focus on design and emphasis on an iterative process that will entail making drawings of paths and landscape features, the class is best suited for students with artistic/graphic backgrounds including drawing experience. Evaluations will be based on participation and sustained engagement with course content, responses to this material in the form of short, illustrated essays that combines notes and simple diagrams, photographs, and sketches, and commitment to an iterative process centering on use of drawings to convey information about existing spatial conditions and to project what these path spaces might look like in the future.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $100.  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS."
"This topical studio explores the application of ecological design principles in urban settings to counteract ongoing environmental injustices. Participants will investigate low cost, high impact approaches to water reuse for a neighborhood in medieval Islamic Cairo (Egypt) suffering from poverty, food insecurity, and increasingly severe climate change impacts. As with many other neighborhoods in Cairo and cities throughout Egypt, the residents of al-Khalifa confront the irony of abundance amidst scarcity: living in a hot, arid desert environment where rainfall is virtually nonexistent at the same time dealing with a failing water supply infrastructure (leaky pipes) raising the groundwater table, saturating and undermining building foundations, and exacerbating respiratory illnesses. This studio will investigate possibilities for intercepting and treating this water to help drive community-scale rooftop gardening (in a city where food prices have risen dramatically in recent years), introducing street level evaporative (passive) cooling features to improve comfort by ameliorating the urban heat island effect, and in other ways enlisting recycled water to beneficial ends and premised on the notion that “there is no such thing as waste.”

A “research” studio is a highly collaborative one. Studio participants will have opportunities throughout the term to interact with a Cairo-based team of urban designers, digital animators, storytellers, engineers, heritage conservationists, ethnographers, and others. Students with experience and/or interest in design, food systems, chemistry, the arts, environmental sciences, environmental economics, women’s and gender studies, heritage and cultural history, and anthropology are encouraged to enroll (previous coursework in these areas is not required but will be helpful). This research studio resists “solutionist,” “techno-optimist” approaches (“we have the solution to all your problems”), operating instead from the standpoint of humility in the search for path-of-least-resistance correspondences between available resources and culturally appropriate end uses. To that end, reflection on and articulation of one’s positionality in our global world provides a subtext for all that we do.

Evaluations will be based on participation and sustained engagement with the core studio themes, honing of collaborative capabilities, and commitment to an iterative process involving succinct compositions of written narratives and diagrams and other visual representations of the systems we will be examining. Above all, the studio requires initiative and engagement as we transition from a highly facilitated framework at the beginning of the term (topics, resources and methods that the instructor choreographs) to more independent and applied research given the “life” that project-based work acquires as the term progresses.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 10.  Lab fee: $30.  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS"
"Students hear a series of conflicting messages when it comes to their education and future. Advice, impulses and pressures to “follow your passion”, “study something that will lead to a job”, “create positive change in the world”, can be overwhelming. This is especially true at a school where students design their own major and pathway through the curriculum.

In this course, students will embark upon a journey to design their lives, while simultaneously learning from others who are seeking to balance work, life, family, education, creating change and the myriad of other quotidian tasks. 

Two central questions frame this course: 
How have people seeking to change the world and pursuing their passion sustained themselves personally and professionally? 
How should human ecologists think about and plan their future?

To enrich the process of designing their own lives, students will also learn about the challenges and rewards people encounter when dedicating their lives to creating change. Resources include articles, guest lectures, case studies, interviews and other sources. Highlighting the essential links that exist between professional and personal, ideas and implementation, students will examine a range of careers and endeavors united by their desire to create change. Through this process, students should reflect on what it means to create change in the world and how to embark on that journey.

Students will be evaluated based on their performance, participation and the quality of the assignments they produce over the course of the term including: class participation and facilitation; reflection papers; and a final project.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 14.  Lab fee: $40.  Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"Etymologically, the word ""diaspora"" is traced to the Greek dia meaning through, and speirein, meaning to scatter or to sow. Historically, the term has been associated with narratives of exile, displacement, and migration, and with a sustained relation to what is understood as an originary homeland. Although Jewish diaspora is often the implicit or explicit example through which diaspora is understood, the term has been important for other cultural, ethnic and religious genealogies, as well as for recent efforts to address political questions posed by contemporary configurations of diasporic and displaced populations. In this course, we will use questions about Jewish difference as a point of departure for thinking about questions of diaspora, belonging and unbelonging more generally. Diasporic relations raise questions about what it means to belong to political community, about borders between self and other and between groups, about difference internal and external to the polis, and about the concepts of home, homeland, nation and country. These questions in turn call attention to the relation between different figures and categories central to understandings of home and abroad, stasis and mobility, such as citizen and foreigner, refugee, asylum seeker. This course examines different historical examples of conditions and processes of diaspora by being attentive to conditions and figures of unbelonging. In so doing, we will consider contemporary problems of immigration, displacement, and asylum. We will be particularly attentive to questions about racialization, colonialism, nationalism, gender, sexuality and sexual difference. The course is interdisciplinary, and we will draw on work in postcolonial studies, political theory, literature, anthropology, religion and feminist theory. Students will be evaluated based on attendance, in-class participation, reading responses, and two short analytical essays. 

Level: Advanced.  Prerequisites: Ideally, students should have taken at least 3 courses in Human Studies and/or Arts and Design, or have other background in thinking about politics and representation. Students who have done independent research and internships that engage the topics addressed in the course description will also be prioritized.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $10.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"Across the country, varying state regulations and practices call into question the manner with which students with disabilities are taught, served, and prepared for the future in an economically and socially challenging community and environment. Their rights are governed by the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, the Americans with Disabilities Act, and the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act. Course participants will learn how students with disabilities are ensured their rights to access and a free appropriate public education as well as how this translates into post-secondary education, employment, and society. Students will be evaluated on synthesis of information in written format and in visual presentation and on in-class mutli-modal engagement. Students will also be expected to complete an independent research project evaluating the manner in which disability rights are ensured within the very community and environment in which we live.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None.  Class Limit: 15.  Lab fee: none. Meets the following degree requirements: none."
"Can you trace the anatomy of a catchy song? How does the form and structure of music compare across culture and style? How does sound recording dramatize a song on the sonic stage of headphones, night club sound systems, and car stereos? This practice-based course focuses on strengthening critical listening and musicianship skills, as students learn to dissect recorded performances of popular music across divergent music genres. We will split our time between the classroom and the rehearsal studio, engaging in critical listening, discussion and hands-on musical performance. This course is open to practiced musicians as well as beginners with an interest in singing, instrumental performance, or sound recording. In our weekly classroom sessions, students will develop critical listening skills, including hearing component parts of a sound mix (identifying instruments, voices and their placement in the stereo field), identifying frequencies, recognizing the use of processing effects, describing song form and arrangement techniques, etc. Students will work to articulate what they value about recorded performances through written reflections and presentations in class. In the rehearsal studio, we will dissect the instrumental and vocal parts of several pieces of music to understand how the components conspire to create an overall effect. The class will also experiment with group composition, working to write a few pieces of music together towards the end of the term. For a final project, students will create a short podcast-essay that dissects a recorded performance of their choosing. Evaluation will be based on class participation, completion of written reflections, the final project, and class presentations.

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: 30.  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS"
"A documentary video or film purports to present factual information about the world.  A documentary may take a stand, state an opinion, or advocate a solution to a problem.  A documentary may function in the realm of art.  Documentaries may compile images from archival sources, interview testimonies about social movements or events, record an ongoing event ""as it happens"", or synthesize these and other techniques.  We will look at various documentaries both historic and contemporary, and a number of strategies and styles, including; video diaries/autobiographical works, cinema verite, propaganda, documentary activism, nature documentaries, and experimental genres.   Students will learn the basics of video production, including, using a video camera, video editing, production planning, lighting, microphone use, and interview techniques. Students will make several documentary projects, both collaboratively and individually.  Students will be evaluated on their participation in group discussions and critiques, and on the documentary projects they produce.

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisite: any introductory-level arts and design studio course or film history course (previous video production experience is not required). Lab fee: $50. Class limit: 12.  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS"
"Theatre is, at its core, an embodied investigation of the dynamics of difference and power. This course will focus on how that investigation works both on the page and in production. Students will study the unique architecture of texts written for performance, how plays are built and how they function for an audience.  Student will read aloud a varied selection of contemporary and historical texts for performance, examining them structurally, logistically, aesthetically and from multiple points of view within production work (ie. dramaturgy, design, direction, acting, audience). The class will consider differences in staging and determine through practice, how those choices impact meaning. Students should be prepared to actively engage with the work through discussion, table reads, weekly writing assignments and occasional informal scene work. There will be one required field trip. Students will be evaluated on demonstrated participation in all class activities, screenings and discussion, successful completion of all writing and performance assignments and a final project of their own design.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None. Course limit: 10. Lab fee: $110. Meets the following degree requirement: AD."
"This is an intermediate creative writing course for students interested in writing for theater, film and television. We will read published and unpublished plays, screenplays and tv shows from up and coming writers currently off and on Broadway and in film/television as well as selected plays and screenplays/shows from the cannon based on student interest. Playwrights (and screenwriters), like cartwrights and shipwrights, are all skilled builders of vehicles meant to move people from one place to another. We will explore dramatic structure from the perspective of the audience. Whether writing linear narratives, collage or non-linear plays and films, there is a rhythm to dramatic writing that can be studied. We will make a conscious study of form to free us to write what we are driven to write. Through reading, analysis and writing, we will investigate the dramatic elements of character, conflict, language and theme. The course will include practical writing exercises to motivate and progress the writing from first draft through revision to rehearsal draft. Students will be encouraged to develop productive writer habits and self-discipline. Class time will be divided between hearing students’ work and discussing work we’ve read. We will develop our listening skills when hearing our own and colleagues’ work. We will explore the role of critique in new script development and refine a process that works for us. Students will be expected to bring new pages in to each class building to a complete first draft of a full-length play or screenplay (of any length) by the end of the course. Evaluation will be based on the student’s dedication to developing a writing practice as well as the submitted script. We will conclude with a reading series to give each student the opportunity to hear his or her work in front of an invited audience. Evaluation is based on the quality of student’s written work and participation in class discussion. 

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisites: Permission of instructor.  Class Size: 10.  Lab fee: none. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"In the first part of this course, drawing will be used to experiment, interrogate and expand different aspects of one’s artistic practice. Using a broad range of materials, students are encouraged to work intuitively and take multiple approaches to presenting ideas–especially ideas that may not have been explored previously in their work–and develop them in different ways. Students will create large quantities of drawings based on prompts that will then be discussed with the class. What stands out? What makes a piece surprising or interesting? What revisions can be made to strengthen these moments or motifs? These are kinds of questions that will inform our discussions.

Taken together, these drawings will offer a broad range of possibilities that will then be explored for the rest of the term, during which students will develop a body of work. Students will meet weekly as a group to discuss work made or advanced in the previous week and meet individually with the instructor every other week to discuss materials and other aspects of their art practices. The work made over the course of the term should include material investigation (why are you using the materials you’re using and how does it support your thematic interests?) and embody a range of conceptual concerns. Throughout the term, students will be introduced to several artists’ working methods. Students are expected to work independently and have some degree of familiarity with the materials they choose to work with.

“Drawing” is used broadly here: students working in any medium are encouraged to take this course (for example, a student interested in three-dimensional work might respond to the prompts with forms made from cardboard or other found materials). This course is designed to kickstart a nascent practice or one that might have become dormant or plateaued as well as give students room to experiment and then build on these experiments. Students enrolling in this class should have some form of previous studio experience.   Evaluation will be based on students’ work, participation in class discussions, the ability to offer critical and constructive feedback to one’s peers, and the ability to push oneself beyond one’s comfort zone or perceived limitations—especially when it comes to allowing the work to evolve and change in response to feedback and critique. 

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 8.  Lab fee: $80.  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS."
"Viewed as a regular practice, the descriptive power of drawing can intensify the experience of observational fieldwork, provide the draughtsperson with a richer understanding of the cycles within a landscape, and deepen our relationship with the natural world. The primary setting for this studio course is Mount Desert Island. The subject matter of our visual attention includes trees, rock features, and other indigenous plant life of the island. Students will learn a variety of drawing methods in order to document the natural history of a specific place. Coursework includes: maintaining a field sketchbook, graphically recording the development of a singular botanical life-form over the course of the term, and producing visual notations in the sketchbook during a bi-weekly slide lecture on the history of artistic representations of the natural world. Evaluation is based on class participation, evidence of completion of weekly assignments, and final project. 

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: permission of instructor. Lab fee: $120. Class limit: 12. Meets the following degree requirements: ADS"
"In this course students will learn to make place-based observations of landscapes to consider the processes shaping them. Various climatic and tectonic processes such as erosion and active mountain building are continuously shaping Earth’s diverse landscapes. Humans and other organisms are also shaping and reshaping the Earth’s near surface and have been for at least thousands of years. We can describe these geomorphic processes both qualitatively and quantitatively in order to understand the rates and timescales over which different landscapes develop and evolve. Our descriptions and interpretations of evolving landscapes enable thoughtful interaction and inhabitation. Students will learn about the processes forming and shaping landscapes through both the interpretation of their own local observations as well as an exploration of prior accounts.  We are fortunate to have a rich record of people’s interactions and considerations of the landscape of coastal Maine spanning thousands of years. Students will engage with different accounts of the regional landscape through readings, maps, and conversations with community members. We will also compare aspects of this region’s iconic glacially carved coastal landscape with that of other similarly formed landscapes that are currently located in different geographic, climatic, tectonic, and built environments and therefore exposed to different active processes. Students will learn methods of determining the rates of landscape-shaping processes in order to consider the role of human activities in landscape change. By combining different types of temporal and spatial information, students will learn to identify regional hazards such as mass-wasting events (landslides, debris flows, rock falls, etc.), flooding and coastal erosion. Students will be evaluated based on their performance on weekly assignments and a final project in which students choose one specific coastal Maine location to study. As we will engage with various materials describing landscapes throughout the term (i.e. narrative accounts, maps, scientific reports), this project will be an opportunity for students to practice place-based communication. This course does not have any prerequisites, but a college-level introductory geoscience course is recommended; this course will make use of algebra, GIS-online software, and digital spreadsheets (using Excel or similar software).

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites:  This course does not have any prerequisites, but a college-level introductory geoscience course is recommended. Class Limit: 12. Lab Fee: $100. Meets the following degree requirements: ES."
"This course examines the physical and chemical interactions among the primary systems operating at the Earth’s surface (atmosphere, hydrosphere, cryosphere, biosphere, and geosphere) on various timescales throughout geologic history. In addition, with the rise of modern human civilization and its immense impact on Earth’s systems, we will discuss the Anthrosphere. We will consider internal and external forces that have shaped environmental evolution, including the role of humans in recent geochemical and climatic changes. In this course, we explore the questions: How does modern climate change compare with Earth’s climate variability in deep time? How are the behaviors of Earth’s spheres intertwined? During lecture and laboratory sessions, the goal is to use critical thinking skills to develop a scientific understanding of the complicated array of feedback systems operating at the Earth’s surface and the impacts these have on climate and people. Students will culminate the term with a project that addresses a scientific question or concern that involves at least three of Earth’s spheres with the goal of synthesizing the course material and developing science communication skills. The course will include field trips during class hours and potentially one weekend field trip.

Evaluation will be centered on class participation with an emphasis on small break-out group work, weekly reading and writing exercises, and a final project and report to be presented to the class.

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: A past course in Earth Science or Environmental Science will be useful for this course but not required. Please reach out to the instructor if you have any questions about the relevant background for this class. .  Class limit: 16.  Lab fee: none. Meets the following degree requirements: ES."
COA Student participating in the EcoLeague consortium  program.
"This course explores selected themes in ecological economics, which is both the economics of sustainability and resilience as well as a paradigmatic approach distinct from mainstream neoclassical economics. We will use the first several weeks of the term to define and outline ecological economics. We will use the remainder of the term to explore relevant current topics; possible themes include climate change, fossil fuels and renewable energy, green technology and investment, ecosystem conservation (ecosystem services, payment for ecosystem services), biophysical constraints to economic growth (technological optimism/pessimism, the precautionary principle, rebound effects and Jevon’s Paradox), sociocultural impacts of economic growth (consumption, happiness studies), system dynamics (steady state economy, critical transitions in complex systems, resiliency), common pool resources (fisheries, climate, forests), measurement issues (growth versus development, ecological footprint, Index of Sustainable Economic Welfare), political economy and political ecology (land grabbing, violence), methodological issues (post-normal science, transdisciplinarity), institutional arrangements, trade and development (embodied trade in energy and water, pollution havens), community sustainability (localization, commoning) , philosophical issues (Buddhist economics, Gandhian economics, homo economicus, feminist economics), and degrowth. Evaluation will be via four short essays, a final poster presentation, and classroom engagement.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: one term of economics or permission of instructor.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"We typically think of cities as centers of political and economic power, social vibrancy (and tension), and cultural richness, diversity and production. This course explores ecological “readings” of cities, landscapes transformed irrevocably due to human activities and the introduction of unprecedented concentrations of “unnatural” substances and significant loss of biological and hydrological integrity. The course also examines processes by which cities have transformed surrounding regional landscapes as both “wells” of resources and “sinks” for waste and the planetary scale environmental impacts of urban growth in the contemporary global economy. Following a succinct historical survey in the first part of the class (with focus on the interrelated forces of industrialization, colonization and explosive urban growth in the nineteenth century), we will look to recent efforts to reimagine cities such that they are more “ecological.” These efforts come in a variety of forms from “city as refugia” (establishing habitat for nonhumans) to “novel ecosystems” (working with new concentrations of contaminants and colonization of non-native biological communities) to cities as settings in which closed-loop, ecologically inspired systems drive processes of development. Of concern related to all of these ecological urbanisms is that conversion of city landscapes from grey to green and blue can lead to ever greater levels of inequality. In the final section of the course, we will speculate as to ways to intervene in cities-as-ecosystems that build on commitments to both social justice and ecological replenishment, bringing into relation the flourishing of humans and nonhumans in urbanized environments. Evaluations will be based on class participation and sustained engagement with the core themes: attendance, demonstration of close readings of texts, contributions to group discussions (including listening), honing of collaborative capabilities, and commitment to an iterative process with the three course projects (the last of which will be worked on in teams) that involve succinct compositions of written narratives and diagrams and other visual representations (multiple graphics workshops will be structured into the class).

Level: Introduction/Intermediate. Prerequisite: None. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: $25. Meets the following degree requirement: AD."
"This course examines ecology in the classic sense: the study of the causes and consequences of the distribution and abundance of organisms. We examine the assumptions and predictions of general models of predator-prey interactions, inter- and intra-species competition, island biogeography, and resource use, and compare these models to the results of experimental tests in lab and field. In addition we discuss appropriate techniques used by ecologists in collecting data in the field, note-taking and the appropriate collation and storage of field data. Although this course is NOT a course in Conservation Biology, we examine how ecological principles are applied to conservation questions.  Readings include selections from the primary literature. Students are evaluated on the basis of class participation and two in depth problem sets,drawing extensively on the primary literature.

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisites:  Biology: Form and Function.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee $75.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES"
"The American West has played a key role in the development of modern ecology and in our overall understanding of the Natural History of North America. Researchers such as Joseph Grinnell, Starker Leopold, Ned Johnson, Phillip Munz and Jim Patton contributed enormously to our understanding of the interactions, distribution and abundance of the enormous range of plants and animals occupying the western states, while the incredible variety of topography found between the Pacific slope and Great Basin Desert, containing both the highest and lowest points in the Lower 48, has provided an ideal setting for both observation and experimentation. This intensive field-based course will provide students with the opportunity to examine first-hand some key habitats within Nevada, California, and New Mexico, and to conduct a series of short projects on the fauna and flora in select sites. Areas to be examined will include terminal saline lakes, open deserts , montane meadows, pine forest, riparian hardwoods, wetlands, and agricultural landscapes. Readings will include primary sources and more popular accounts of both locations and the peoples who have lived in these lands over the past several thousand years. Evaluation will be based on class participation, a series of individual research projects and presentations, a detailed field journal, a mid-term and a final exam.  This course will be integrated with and requires co-enrollment in Reading the West and Wilderness in the West.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: Permission of instructor.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: none.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES"
"This course emphasizes field studies of the ecology of Mount Desert Island, incorporating labs and field trips.  Each exercise focuses on a central ecological concept.  Topics include intertidal biology and diversity, forest trees and site types, bedrock geology, soil biology, insect diversity, pollination ecology, freshwater biology, predation, herbivory, and the migration of birds.  Discussions include the development of natural history as a science and the role of natural selection in the evolution of diversity.  Students are expected to keep a field notebook or journal, to undertake a project, and to write a term paper.  Class meets for two lecture sessions and one lab session or two field/lab sessions per week.  The course is particularly appropriate for students concentrating in Environmental Education.  

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None; field work involves strenuous hiking. Class Limit: 11. Lab fee: $95.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES"
"Economic growth in the developing world has lifted millions out of poverty at the same time that misguided attempts at widespread application of generic economic development theories has impoverished millions. As a result of this tragedy, new approaches and methodologies to economic development are emerging, and represent some of the most important, dynamic, and controversial theories in all of economics. This course examines these new perspectives on economic development. We will briefly contextualize the new by reviewing ""old"" economic development, then move on to theories that emphasize very place-based, country-specific approaches to how economies develop; this will involve examining the specific roles of capital accumulation, capital flows (including foreign exchange, portfolio capital, foreign direct investment, and microfinance), human capital, governance, institutions (especially property rights, legal systems, and corruption), geography and natural resource endowments, industrial policy (e.g. free trade versus dirigiste policies), and spillovers, clustering, and entrepreneurship. The course will involve a rigorous mix of economic modeling, careful application of empirical data (including both historical analysis and cross-sectional studies; students with no exposure to econometrics will receive a brief introduction) and country studies. Evaluation will be based on classroom participation, responses to reading questions, short essays, and a final project consisting of an economic development country study of the student’s choice that demonstrates application of theoretical concepts to the real world.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: One economics course. Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: none.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS, QR"
"Economics is slowly expanding from equilibrium-based, atomistic optimization, through dyadic strategic interaction, to the consideration of networks and complexity. At the same time, it is beginning to incorporate more complex human motivations beyond simple optimization as means of explaining economic outcomes. This course captures these trends by the study of the economics of cooperation, networks, and trust. We will focus on four major ways of understanding cooperation: individual optimization, strategic optimization, institutions, and embedded social relationships (networks), and we will apply cooperation to the contexts of commonly held resources (such as fisheries and climate), networks and strategic alliances, and formal economic organizations (cooperatives). After an introduction to the relevant issues and an examination of the standard neoclassical approach of optimization (with cooperation as part of the choice set), we will enrich our understanding of group cooperation through the examination of social capital, tacit knowledge, and common pool resources. We will then have a brief exposure to game theoretic approaches to conceptualizing strategic behavior, along with graph theory as a means of conceptualizing networks. With these tools in hand, we will examine the role of networks in economic contexts such as the networks of Emilia Romagna, the Mondragón complex, and worker-owned businesses in the United States and Canada. This course will be of interest to students interested in business and organizational management, natural resource management, sociology, community development, globalization, social movements, economic democracy, and a host of other topics. Evaluation will be based on participation in classroom discussions, several major assignments, and responses to reading questions. We will collaboratively decide on a final project; possibilities poster presentations, a community presentation, or a jointly produced research or policy paper.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced.  Prerequisites: One course in college or IB economics.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: $40.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"Economies don’t behave, and markets are full of surprises: housing prices crash, stock market bubbles pop, once-powerful firms wither while previously unknown start-ups surge, and economic production and unemployment yo-yo in the face of a global pandemic. These and many other surprising phenomena occur because markets and economies are complex adaptive systems: they involve a host of nonlinear relationships that make them unpredictable beyond the short-term. Such systems additionally exhibit long memories (history matters), extract and process information from their environment, and exhibit evolutionary processes. Mainstream Neoclassical Economics is well-suited for short term predictions and suggesting market tendencies, but a different kind of economics is necessary for a comprehensive understanding of markets and economies. This course uses concepts of Complexity, a tapestry of interrelated ideas that includes nonlinear dynamics, emergence, fractals, scaling, cellular automata, networks, evolution, and related concepts, to explore economic phenomena that cannot readily be explained by Neoclassical Economics. We will start with a fairly succinct and less-technical introduction to the elements of Complexity outlined above, in part using Agent Based Modeling (ABM) to illustrate various phenomena; in this process, students will be introduced to NetLogo, a powerful software for ABM. (No prior background in programming is required.) We will then move to exploring Complexity Economics, with an initial emphasis on evolutionary processes within markets and economies. We will conclude with examinations of particular complex economic and social phenomena, such as wealth distribution, climate action, and scaling in firms, urban areas, and sociopolitical units. This course is particularly relevant for students interested in economics, business, climate change policy and action, social-ecological systems, and environmental policy. Evaluation will be based on classroom engagement, four problem sets, and a final poster on a topic of the student’s choosing.

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: One course in college-level economics.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS, QR."
"We live in times of pervasive suffering; this includes our climate crisis, social divides, and growing mental health crises. People are looking for understanding and solutions. Such instructive guidance can be found in the field of ecopsychology. Integrating timeless lessons from our planet with the contemporary knowledge of psychology provides pathways we need for healing, resilience and healthy solutions. The benefits apply individually, collectively and ecologically.

This class will provide students with an introduction to three interdependent fields: climate psychology, ecotherapy and psychological biomimicry. Within these frameworks, participants will explore empirically proven ecopsychological principles, perspectives and practices with broad applicability. This exploration will provide foundations for understanding the psychological roots of many human struggles, as well as strategies for meaningful, systemic change. As part of this interdisciplinary course, students will explore related fields of systems theory, mental health, nature therapy, forest bathing, communications and leadership.

The curriculum each week will include experiential activities, readings, personal reflections and discussion. Students will be encouraged to explore multiple ways of learning and knowing, including diverse applications of course material. Furthermore, each participant will have a turn to develop and facilitate group learning inquiries based on readings and course subject matter. Evaluations will be based on attendance, class participation, reading responses, comprehension of the material and a final project of their choosing.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"Ecosystem ecology is the branch of ecological science that considers the large-scale transfer of matter and energy among different living and non-living compartments in ecosystems. Thinking about the natural world with this level of abstraction has provided critical insights into the processes that support life on Earth, the feedbacks that connect the geosphere and atmosphere to the biosphere, and the ways life is likely to respond to large-scale perturbations such as climate change. In this course, we will explore the deep history of life on earth and how living things have transformed the chemistry of the planet. We will study how energy flows and nutrients cycle in present-day ecosystems, and how these processes are coupled and regulated by the actions of living organisms. Using examples from terrestrial, freshwater, and marine systems, we will study how to quantify fluxes of energy and matter. We will analyze the factors that affect rates of ecosystem processes such as plant growth and decomposition in different ecoregions. We will explore the feedbacks that link living and non-living matter into a single complex network. The drivers and ramifications of climate change will be a recurring theme throughout the term. This course will be useful for students interested in global change research, particularly those who plan to pursue graduate degrees in related fields. Students will be assessed based on class participation, a research paper and presentation, and a project on communicating scientific information. 

Level: Intermediate/Advanced.  Prerequisites: Cellular Processes of Life (or equivalent) AND Ecology, and permission of instructor.  Class limit: 20.  Lab fee: none.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES"
"Given the rapid pace of change in communications, career opportunities, learning options, and the global economy, U.S. schools are struggling to adapt. As technology, culture, politics, and media facilitate new and more diverse means of learning, how are educators adjusting to ""new"" learners from toddlers through senior adults? Driving questions include: Who is leading innovation and where?  What are some of the ways educators are experimenting with teaching? How are innovators changing the purposes of schools? Who is currently starting schools and why? How is brain research impacting innovation within and outside of public schools? How are digital natives, eco-warriors, and the call for global literacy accommodated in mainstream schools? If public schools, as some charge, have outlived their usefulness: what next for education?

With the objective of exploring and understanding innovative ideas for classrooms, school design, and district structures, as well as alternative places and means of learning, we will work toward a more comprehensive understanding of what is new, and potentially revolutionary, in schools and in education beyond schooling. Evaluation will be based on class participation (including leading a discussion around a particular area of individual interest), a series of four reaction papers, and both live and virtual ""field"" explorations of innovative practices and organizations. The final project will be based on the design and proposal of an innovative educational option.

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: none.  Class Limit: 15.  Lab Fee: $10"
"In this practice based course, multidisciplinary theater artist Donna Oblongata will work with COA students to further develop materials for EF!, a new musical about the Earth First! movement. Often labeled “eco-terrorists” by the media and government, Earth First! pioneered, over 40 years, many of the direct action techniques that have now become de rigueur in the fight for climate change awareness, protest and intervention. Students will have the opportunity to engage dramaturgically, researching the history of the direct action environmental movement as well as American musical and documentary theater forms. Students will also work as a small ensemble, effectively workshopping and evolving production materials. Each week will offer opportunities for both solo and collaborative work, developing the group's research into scenes, songs, characters and conflict. Students will be evaluated on the successful completion of all individual and collaborative assignments as well as their demonstrated commitment and contributions to the shared project. The class will culminate with an informal showing of the work in progress. 
Default grading for this course is credit/no credit.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: Previous theatre and production experience recommended but not required. By nature, the course necessitates creating a small collaborative working production ensemble. Participants will be selected based on level and qualities of interest and experience with the specific content and genre of this work. Seniority will also be taken into account. Class limit: 11. Lab fee: $35. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"This class will be an intensive immersive exploration of presidential elections in the United States. It runs only in the Fall terms of US presidential election years, using the current campaign as a lens through which to explore a wide array of issues related to presidential elections specifically, as well as elections in the US generally. It is structured as a working lab that is supplemented with a series of discussion and lecture sessions. In lab sessions students will combine into teams to conduct term long tracking projects focused on the upcoming US presidential election. This may include battleground state profiling, campaign finance monitoring, litigation tracking, advertising and media placement, debate watches, candidate travel schedules, etc. In addition to the lab sessions, regular discussion and lecture sessions will provide students with a crash course in interdisciplinary approaches to a range of issues related to the conduct of US presidential elections. This may include examinations of the history of campaigns, campaign advertising and messaging, the structure of presidential elections and the role of the electoral college, the conduct of voting and voter access, campaign finance reform, empirical research on campaign effects and outcomes, polling and poll methodology, campaign organization and administrative structure, best practices for GOTV and targeted mobilization, etc. A great deal of what will be covered in both the lab and discussion sessions will depend on the nature of the current campaign in that particular year and which issues are most salient. Students will also take part in ongoing community education projects at different times throughout the term, whether that involves providing assistance through voter registration and access, debate watch debriefings, issue education, candidate profiles, community forums, etc.. On the night of the election the class will organize and host a returns watching festival on campus. The class will develop the various activities and events for the festival, and coordinate the planning alongside the instructor. The remaining class sessions after the election will focus on debriefing the results as well as addressing any outstanding issues that linger beyond election day (e.g. disputes over election counts and the certification of results). Students will be evaluated on the basis of their engagement with class sessions and other class related activities, their work for their tracking projects, short form response papers related to discussion topics, their debrief reports, and check in meetings with the instructor. Presidential election season can be a stressful, and at times uplifting time for many community members. This class is a great way to engage the campaigns in a direct and hands on manner, while also learning more about elections generally and presidential elections specifically. It is open to a wide range of students with varied interests. Given the working lab nature of the class, it is flexible enough to accommodate both students who have had extensive experience with politics and campaigning in the US context, as well as students for whom this will be their first exposure to anything campaign related, and everyone else in between.

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS."
"In this course, students will learn the fundamentals of electrochemistry: how electrons pass through solid materials, aqueous and non-aqueous solutions, and about any oxidation/reduction phenomenon that may occur alongside the passage of electrons. Students will learn about conductivity, resistance, and diffusion, through a variety of hands-on laboratory experiments. Most of our laboratory electrochemical experiments will be relevant to elucidating potential mechanisms for the origin of life at deep sea hydrothermal vents, and others will center around characterization of novel organic macromolecules. Students will be assessed based on their participation in laboratory experiments, through laboratory reports, and participation in discussions of assigned readings. Students will be expected to complete three hours of self scheduled laboratory work outside of normal class sessions. These will be supervised by the instructors. Organic Chemistry II is a prerequisite for this class. Students who have not had Organic Chemistry II, but want to take the class should contact the instructor directly for potential permission to add. 

Level: Advanced. Prerequisites: Organic Chemistry or permission of instructor.  Class limit: 10.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES, QR"
"Recent reports say we need to cut global carbon emissions in half by 2030 and eliminate carbon emissions by 2050 or sooner. How can we electrify climate solutions to meet these urgent targets? What steps are needed to eliminate fossil fuel consumption, and how quickly can we implement them? To maintain the habitability of the planet, we have no choice but to win the carbon endgame. This course will discuss the technical requirements of the clean energy transition, including beneficial electrification, energy efficiency and renewable energy, but the emphasis will be on societal shifts needed to accelerate economy-wide decarbonization. Students will examine how fossil fuel corporations have lied about their impacts on the climate for decades, and how that has influenced policies and funding programs. This course will focus on readings, reflection and discussion. Topics covered will include the social, environmental, and economic impacts of fossil fuels versus renewable energy. Students will examine the role of diverse economic sectors including real estate, finance, and education in this transition. Students will explore the facets of transitioning an entire town or neighborhood away from fossil fuels, and the benefits or challenges associated with planning and implementing projects at a larger scale than an individual home. How can we completely transition off fossil fuels within a generation? Students who successfully complete this course will be able to identify the steps to transition a building off fossil fuels, and have a conversational understanding of how various economic sectors are critical to support the global clean energy transition. This course will provide students with the tools and experience to reduce community energy use and greenhouse gas emissions in a holistic manner. Evaluation will be based on participation in class discussions, completion of 3-4 written assignments including reflection papers, and 1-2 class presentations.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 15. Lab fee: $30. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"How have changes in energy mapped onto existing social, political, and economic structures? What are people’s reactions to changing energy regimes? How have people resisted and protested the effects energy infrastructures have on their lives? This course will examine the social history of energy in the United States and Canada from the early 1900s through the present. Using case studies of energy regimes and energy transitions, it explores the uneven effects of energy technologies on disparate groups of people. Students will study the impact of energy transitions on individuals and communities through the lenses of race, class, gender, and coloniality. The course will focus on case studies including petrochemical landscapes, nuclear imperialism, electrification, and energy consumption. Students will also explore the ways individuals have resisted and protested environmental injustices stemming from energy production. These include grassroots mobilizations for alternative energy technologies, consumer movements, and activism against mountaintop removal and highway construction, to name just a few. This course is not a comprehensive social history of energy but introduces students to the ways social, cultural, political, and environmental contexts shape technological change over time.  Students will engage in several essay assignments that synthesize course readings. We will also work on a class project that begins to map out the social history of energy in Maine. What questions do we have about Maine’s energy landscapes? Who are the main protagonists? What energy transitions have shaped this state? Where would we find the archival evidence to write a social history of energy in Maine?  Students will be evaluated on the basis of participation in class discussion, several writing assignments that focus on synthesizing course materials and course themes, and a research project proposal which will include an annotated bibliography. They may choose to work with others for the research proposal. Students can choose to create a proposal for a creative project (podcast, video, website, art piece, etc.).

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"This course is an introduction to the field of environmental chemistry, an exploration of chemicals and their reactivity/effect on the atmosphere, as well as aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems. Specifically, we will examine the sourcing, transport, and fate of specific chemicals in the context the following issues: air pollution, climate change, water pollution, hazardous organic compounds, soil health and waste disposal. Generally, environmental chemistry focuses on these two questions: 1) What is in the environment? and 2) What are the effects? The related question of how we design safer materials and products so that harmful chemicals don’t end up in the environment in the first place is covered in the follow-up course, Green Chemistry. There are two classes per week, as well as a field-based laboratory section. Evaluation is based on participation in discussions, exams, and group laboratory reports.

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisites: Chemistry I/II.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $100.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES, QR"
"How has human history shaped and been shaped by ""the environment""?  Environmental history is one of the most exciting new fields in history.  In this course we examine world history from Mesopotamia to the present to see the role such things as resource scarcity, mythology, philosophy, imperialism, land policy, theology, plagues, scientific revolutions, the discovery of the new world, the industrial revolution, etc. on the natural, social, and built environments.

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: none.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS HY"
"In this seminar, we will examine the history of environmental justice movements and will compare and contrast a series of past and current cases in both urban and rural settings, within and beyond the United States. In each, we will explore the patterns and processes giving rise to the uneven distribution of harm to human and non-human communities, and the remarkable strength and resilience of BIPOC communities in response to these harms. As women have often been the source of dissent and change, each case will interrogate the intersectionality of race, class, and gender. In the first half of the class, we will examine the concepts of race, environment, and justice through personal experiences and then reflect upon these within the context of readings, podcasts, and guest speakers. In the second half of the seminar, cases will be developed based on the students’ location and will map the political, social and economic processes that deny the right to a safe environment and what are five different approaches that might support the necessary social and political transformation for environmental justice.

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: 2nd year and higher, permission of instructor. Students should be prepared to engage with a diverse array of texts. One of the following courses would be helpful: Indigenous America, Climate Justice, Contemporary Artist as Researcher and Activist. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: none."
"This course provides an overview of environmental law and the role of law in shaping environmental policy.  We examine, as background, the nature and scope of environmental, energy, and resource problems and evaluate the various legal mechanisms available to address those problems.  The course attempts to have students critically analyze the role of law in setting and implementing environmental policy.  We explore traditional common law remedies, procedural statutes such as the National Environmental Policy Act, intricate regulatory schemes, and market-based strategies that have been adopted to control pollution and protect natural resources.  Students are exposed to a wide range of environmental law problems in order to appreciate both the advantages and limitations of law in this context.  Special attention is given to policy debates currently underway and the use of the legal process to foster the development of a sustainable society in the United States.  Students are required to complete four problem sets in which they apply legal principles to a given fact scenario.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced.  Prerequisites:  Introduction to the Legal Process or Philosophy of the Constitution strongly recommended.  Offered at least every other year.  Class limit: 20.  Lab fee $10.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"The manner in which animals survive in extreme environments or function at levels that far exceed human capacities has always fascinated us.  In this course, we examine how an animal's physiology fashions its functional capacities under various environmental conditions.  We explore the interrelationships between physiology, behavior, and ecology using an integrated and evolutionary approach in order to understand regulatory responses in changing environments.  Major areas to be covered include thermoregulation, behavioral energetics, and osmoregulation.  Emphasis is placed on vertebrate systems to elucidate general patterns in physiological attributes.  This course has two lecture/discussion sessions per week and students are evaluated on class participation, a series of take-home exams, and a class presentation. 

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisites: Biology: Form and Function and Biology: Cellular Processes of Life, or equivalent.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee:  $65.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES"
"This course will be an exploration of four heroines from two Hindu epics, Mahabharata and Ramayana. Central to the upbringing of more than half of the Indian population through comic books, TV shows, movies, and the like, these texts have set the standard for what an ideal Hindu woman should be, bolstering the patriarchal system in the name of religion and culture. Much like Helen of Troy, “the face that launched a thousand ships,” some of these women have been the cause of wars of “epic proportions.” The myth of their beauty has long been part of these narratives, but do we hear them speak? What do we know about the power they yield? Epics have been unable to provide us with concrete answers.
Therefore, we will turn to female authors like Chitra Banerjee Divakaruni, Kavita Kané, Volga, and Vaishnavi Patel, who have created spaces where these voices can be heard and analyzed, where these women can be studied as multifaceted humans. We’ll not only close read their novels but also supplement their work with feminist theory and short videos. Eventually, we’ll trace how these epics stay relevant with regard to the issues that plague modern Indian women.

Students will be evaluated based on class participation, oral presentation, final paper, and a multimodal project. This class will be good for students who are interested in reading feminist literature and theory and understanding Indian culture, past and present.

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 15. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: HS."
"This course will explore heroines from two Hindu epics, Mahabharata and Ramayana, alongside the Greek mythological figures Ariadne, Medusa, Circe, and Galatea. Both sets of heroines have generated deeply rooted cultural archetypes. Central to the upbringing of more than half of the Indian population through comic books, TV shows, movies, and the like, the Hindu epics have set the standard for what an ideal Hindu woman should be, bolstering the patriarchal system in the name of religion and culture. Much like Helen of Troy, “the face that launched a thousand ships” in Greek mythology, some of these women have been the cause of wars of “epic proportions.” Others have become infamous archetypes for women’s witchiness and trouble-making, especially in Greek epics Western authors have retold. Myths of their beauty or its opposite have long been part of these narratives, but do we hear them speak? What do we know about the power they yield? Epics and mythologies have been unable to provide us with concrete answers.

Therefore, we will turn to female authors like Chitra Banerjee Divakaruni, Kavita Kané, Volga, and Vaishnavi Patel for the Hindu epics and Madeline Miller, Jennifer Saint, and Rosie Hewlett for the Greek tales. These authors have created spaces where women’s voices can be heard and analyzed, where archetypal and epic types can be studied as multifaceted humans. We’ll not only read their novels closely but also supplement their work with feminist theory and short videos. Eventually, we’ll trace how these epics stay relevant with regard to the construction of gender and sexuality in the modern Indian and Western world.

Students will be evaluated based on class participation, an oral presentation, response posts, final paper, and a multimodal project. This class will be good for students who are interested in reading feminist literature and theory and understanding the enduring power of epics and myths as well as the contemporary feminist purpose in giving their heroines voice. Reading the Indian epics alongside the Greek tales will provide an opportunity for ample comparison of patriarchal systems and how they developed in representative cultures from the East and West.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS."
"This seminar will provide an in-depth exploration of public speech texts by a wide array of 19th century woman suffrage activists in the United States. This includes works by those individuals most often associated with the first wave of the movement including: Susan B. Anthony, Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Sojourner Truth, Frances Ellen Watkins Harper, Ernestine Rose, Anna Dickinson, Lucretia Mott,  Victoria Woodhull, as well as other activists who are generally less well known today. While this is a course rooted in the history of what we might consider early American feminism, it should come as no surprise that, along the way, we will confront issues that continue to have salience today.  Many of the topics surrounding gender, sex, identity, equality, empowerment, and political allyship that these activists wrestled with are still just as relevant for us to consider in our contemporary context.  This is especially true when it comes to the topic of race and the intersectional nature of the discourse around gender equality, both then and now. We will spend time examining how the idea of race was rhetorically constituted, in both exclusionary and inclusionary ways, within these texts.  We will also look specifically at the works of early Black feminists in the United States, and the myriad of ways they  navigated the challenges of the moment, especially as they confronted a deeply embedded legacy of white supremacy within the early woman suffrage movement.   Rather than rely primarily on secondary historical accounts, there will be a heavy emphasis on the close reading of primary source materials, mostly speeches, as we encounter these speakers “in their own words.” In addition, students will also take part in “hands on” recovery projects designed to locate, transcribe, document, and make broadly accessible works  from the period that have been previously undocumented or left unaccounted for. In doing so, students will learn basic techniques for exploring and making effective use of various types of digitized historical collections that have emerged in recent years. Class sessions will be organized as a discussed based seminar.  Assignments will emphasize critical, reflective, and analytical writing. Evaluation will be based on participation in class discussion, short written response papers, two longer form take-home essays, individual presentations, and a final “recovery” project. Students interested in topics related to gender, politics, historical research, and activism are especially encouraged to enroll. This is an introductory class and open to all students regardless of whether they have a previous background in feminism, social theory, US history, or politics.

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: none.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: none.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS, HY"
"This seminar will provide an in-depth exploration of public speech texts by a wide array of 19th century woman suffrage activists in the United States. This includes works by those individuals most often associated with the first wave of the movement including: Susan B. Anthony, Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Sojourner Truth, Ernestine Rose, Lucy Stone, Anna Dickinson, Lucretia Coffin Mott, Adelle Hazlett, Victoria Woodhull, Anna Julia Cooper, and others. There will be a heavy emphasis on the close reading of primary source materials as students encounter these speakers ""in their own words."" There are five main goals of this seminar. First, to familiarize students with the works of prominent suffrage and equal rights activists from the period. Second, to help illuminate how the ideas, choices, narratives, and arguments reflected in these texts have some relation to contemporary discourses of gender, power, and equality. Third, to offer students the opportunity to conduct close textual readings of significant texts in the field of public address. This seminar is rooted in what might be described as an experiential, grassroots approach to rhetorical criticism, one that is unconstrained by the needs of overly deterministic reading strategies. We will focus more on building a ""theory of the case"" from the ground up and through the eyes of the seminar participants, rather than subjecting each case to the demands of a predetermined comprehensive model of rhetorical action. The fourth goal of the class is to offer students the first hand opportunity to conduct their own “recovery” projects with the aim of locating, transcribing, documenting, and presenting to the class new variations of texts from the period that have been previously undocumented or left unaccounted for. In doing so, students will learn basic techniques for exploring the types of digitized historical collections that have emerged in only the past few years. The final goal for the seminar is to prompt an even broader series of questions about the relationship between text, society, and the ""public."" These are questions that would obviously be salient for students of all interests. Class sessions will be organized as a weekly three hour seminar and will be predominantly discussion driven. Students will be responsible for presenting certain works and will also lead some of our discussions. Assignments will emphasize critical, reflective and analytical writing. Evaluation will be based on participation in class discussion, short written response papers, several longer essays, individual presentations, and a final ""recovery"" project.

Level: Advanced.  Prerequisites: none.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: none.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS, HY"
"In this course, students will be introduced to the fundamental concepts related to educational equity and social justice.They will examine how power, privilege and oppression operate across and/or at the intersection of social identities grounded in the following topic areas: poverty and socioeconomic status, gender identity and expression, (dis)ability, race as well as sexual orientation. To that end, students will engage in in-depth exploration of their social identities and check their own prejudice. Concurrently, they will practice skills that allow them to recognize and respond to identity-based biases within educational contexts and work towards creating and sustaining equitable and inclusive learning environments for all learners, but especially for those coming from the marginalized communities. Every week, students will read texts that introduce key concepts in one of the above-mentioned topic areas. They will also practice analyzing cases that depict scenarios of bias and inequity in education, using the Equity Literacy Framework. In addition to their peers, students will also engage in weekly conversations and discussions with guest speakers from diverse educational communities, such as K-12 schools, higher education institutions, educational community organizations, etc. Evaluation will be based on the following: an autoethnographic portfolio that consists of the artifacts each student produces throughout the term while exploring their own social identities as well as a reflection paper; a review of a book in one of the above-mentioned topic areas; and a final project where students work in groups to create digital resource guides that educators can use to address social justice issues with their learners.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: An introductory course in educational or social sciences recommended. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: $20."
"Ways we engage with writing and literacy have shifted dramatically due to technological innovations, raising urgent questions about ethics, authorship, voice, and academic integrity and (dis)honesty. How can we develop our writing knowledge and literacy skills alongside rapidly changing tools? What challenges, issues, and opportunities do technological developments offer for the ways in which writing and learning will happen throughout life? This course examines what ethical, legal and safety issues arise in the use of digital technologies and resources and how they might shape authorship and a writer’s voice and agency. The goals are to: 1) deepen understandings of key developments in writing technologies and related social transformations; 2) strengthen abilities in fair, inclusive, effective, ethical methods of dialogue and collaboration; 3) strengthen abilities for metacognitive learning; 4) and deepen genre knowledge and rhetorical awareness through explorations in the contexts of various discourse communities.

Weekly writing assignments and collaborative learning activities are facilitated through readings, case studies, and projects. Readings include short works that explain and critically analyze ongoing developments in writing related technologies. Class sessions alternate between mini-lectures and seminar discussions exploring changing historical contexts and socio-technologies of writing. Writing activities include peer review, structured collaborations, and individual as well as group exercises with various multimodal genres. There are two class sessions per week.

Students must come prepared to challenge themselves and others in supportive ways. This course fulfills the first-year writing requirement but is also appropriate for more advanced students interested in exploring issues of ethics, authorship, academic integrity and (dis)honesty from a human ecological perspective.

Students are evaluated on class participation and contributions in individual and group activities/assignments that demonstrate progress in meeting the four course goals.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $35.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS, W."
"Ethnographic research is based primarily on anthropology's signature research method known as ""participant-observation fieldwork."" This course introduces students to the main techniques, questions, insights and debates that this research method has historically involved in the formation of the discipline of anthropology, and the contemporary relevance of these questions and debates for a range of ethnographic and interdisciplinary projects. Over the term, students will view ethnographic films and read classic and contemporary ethnographic texts, as well as social and political theory that has informed ethnography. The course will address questions about representation, authenticity, experience, evidence, familiarity and difference, place and time, the everyday and the extraordinary, politics and ethics. Students will be asked to participate in the central methods of ethnographic research including taking fieldnotes, conducting formal and informal interviews with both familiar others and with strangers, formulating a research question, and analyzing qualitative data. Assignments will include informal reading responses, a mid-term mini-field project, and a final mini-field project that builds on the mid-term. Evaluation will be based on these assignments and on class participation and final presentations of their projects.

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: none.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: none.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"Ethnographic writing, literally the ""writing of a people,"" is anthropology’s primary disciplinary mode of representation, based on participant-observation fieldwork. Early ethnographies were usually written by anthropologists from Europe and the United States about people they had studied in other parts of the world. In the 1970s and on, critical questions about representation increasingly challenged assumptions about ethnographic work, raising questions about objectivity, transparency, politics and the relationship of ethnographers to the people and places about  which they are writing. This class will introduce students to a range of ethnographies in the discipline of anthropology, as well as to some of the political, cultural, and intellectual debates and contexts in which these ethnographies were produced. At the same time, we will consider epistemological, ethical, philosophical and methodological issues that such writing involves, including questions about representation, translation, difference and interpretation. In addition to classic ethnographies, we will also read some fiction, travel writing, and journalism. We will consider questions about how ethnographic knowledge is authorized, how assumptions about interpretation shape ethnographic writing, relations between individual and group, and the relations between author and reader. Students will be asked to experiment with ethnographic writing themselves, through a series of short writing assignments as well as a final project. The course is designed to allow students to workshop their own writing. Students will be evaluated on the development and improvement of their own writing over the course of the term, on their attention to observation of selected ethnographic sites, on their ability to critically evaluate and closely read ethnographies as texts, and on their engagement with their peers’ writing in peer review exercises. 

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS."
"The European Union is a fascinating, ongoing experiment in international cooperation. Currently twenty-eight countries have joined together in a supra-national political and economic union, creating a political entity unique to a world of sovereign individual nation-states. This course focuses on understanding this complex and evolving union through study of its main political institutions: the European Council of Ministers, the European Parliament, and the European Commission. We will look at the workings of and functional relationships between these institutions through readings, meetings with politicians, bureaucrats, and NGOs involved in European-level politics, and visits to each of the institutions during two weeks in Brussels. We will also spend some time in the course looking at the broader political and cultural context in which the institutions operate, through examination of several important current topics in European politics. Topics could include: refugees and migrants in Europe, the reauthorization of the Common Agricultural Policy, Brexit, the rise of right-wing movements across countries in the EU. Students will be evaluated based on participation in class discussions, a reflective journal kept during their time in Brussels, and a presentation and final essay on a current EU-relevant political issue of their choosing.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate.  Prerequisites: Prior French language instruction, permission of instructor, and co-enrollment in 2-cr HS6015 Immersion Program in French Language and Culture.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: 0.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"This course provides students with the opportunity to put their knowledge of ecology and diversity into an evolutionary framework.  The emphasis is on how populations of organisms are currently evolving, with a focus on the ecological context of natural selection.  Topics in the course include the genetic basis of evolutionary change, selection and adaptation, reproductive effort, co-evolution, the ecology and evolution of sex, behavioral ecology, speciation, and applied evolutionary ecology.  In addition to a textbook, students read several original research articles.  The course has two lectures and one discussion section per week.  Evaluations are based on exams and short essay sets.

Level:  Intermediate.  Prerequisite:  Biology: Form and Function and Biology: Cellular Processes of Life, or equivalent.  Offered every other year.  Class limit: 20.  Lab fee: $50.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES"
"Even before John Dewey published Experience and Education in 1938, experiential education had been practiced in various forms around the world.  This course explores the philosophy of experiential education and its diverse practices in the realms of adventure education, service learning, workplace learning, environmental education, museum education, and school reform.  Group activities and fieldtrips will provide opportunities to participate as both learner and teacher in a variety of teacher-led and student-designed experiences.  The final project involves researching an existing experiential education program, its philosophy, and its practices.  Evaluation is based on class and fieldtrip participation (including one multi-day fieldtrip), reflective logs, curriculum design, service-learning journal, an oral presentation of the service-learning, and a final essay that articulates a philosophy of experience in education.

Level: Introductory.  Offered every other year.  Lab fee: $30.  Class limit: 15.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS ED"
"This course will serve as a workshop both for creating our own short fictions as well as a forum for reading and responding to work by established authors. As a class we will get down to business; we will read and discuss amazing short stories and amazing authors; we will learn how to offer constructive criticism of each other’s work; and we will write, we will write, we will write. Class meetings will combine analysis of published work with a discussion of how individual writers approach their craft. We will study the conflict, character, plot and music of prose. The focus of this class will be literary fiction. I define literary fiction as work that is concerned not just with what happened, but why it happened. It is character driven and explores the motivations, desires, drives and consequences of the complex human experience. It is the stuff of life. Representative authors: Jorge Luis Borges, Julio Cortázar, Amelia Gray, Makoto Kawabata, Gish Jen, Hemingway, Flannery O’Connor, Milan Kundera, Mary Gaitskill, James Baldwin, Junot Diaz. Students are expected to create four shorter and one longer piece of fiction, respond to published writers, lead weekly discussions, participate in class response to fellow writers, and to revise their own work in substantive ways. 

Level: Introductory/Intermediate:  Prerequisites: None.  Course limit: 12.  Lab fee: none.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"Failure looms large in society. Is it a badge of honor, an inextricable part of a process, a means to success or rather something to be feared and ashamed of? In this course, students will explore how notions of failure align and contrast between gender, class and culture. We will also explore if conceptions of failure differ substantially among the artistic, business and other communities. In divergence with historical attitudes, today's entrepreneurs are implored to ""fail cheap and fail fast"" and events, like FailCon, celebrate failure as a badge of honor. In art failure is simply inherent to process. And yet, the fear and sting of failure is real for everyone. Through a series of practicums, readings, guest lectures and discussions this class will explore various aspects of failure. Students will be evaluated on class participation, a series of solo and group projects, selections from a failure journal and contributions to a shared class blog.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: $50."
"This course will provide an introduction to the basics of farm animal care and management with a focus on small-scale, sustainable livestock production. The course will include readings on topics ranging from traditional production agriculture to contemporary sustainable livestock farming, guest lectures from professionals within the local agricultural community (e.g., experienced farmers, Extension agents, and veterinarians), student-led discussions of assigned readings, and hands-on participatory learning through visits to working farms in our area. Students will explore the various health and nutrition needs of common livestock, including monogastrics (hogs), avian (poultry), ruminants (cattle, sheep, goats), and pseudo-ruminants (horses). The course will have a strong focus on the integration of two or more of these livestock species on a diversified farm and will cover pasture management and feed production. Students will be evaluated based on attendance, participation in class discussion and activities, short synthesis essays, and a final project focused on the integration of livestock into a farm setting.

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: Permission of instructor.  Class limit: 10.  Lab fee: $25."
"This course introduces students to some of the central texts and genealogies of feminist thought, with a focus on transnational feminist theory. We will address periods of feminist thought that have been significant in shaping the concerns of transnational feminisms, including 1970s U.S. feminism, French feminism, postcolonial theory, and Marxist thought.  Over the course of the term, we will consider how differences across national borders have informed discussions about transnational feminist solidarity. We will examine how feminist theory can help us think about the following: kinship; reproduction; the law and justice; human rights discourse, political economy, racialized and other forms of difference; existence and the subject; the relation between individual and group; the relation between terms such as ""gender"" and ""sex;"" and the varied currencies the terms ""queer"" and ""feminist"" have carried in different national and transnational contexts. 

The course will explicitly address debates in feminist theory about the following topics: the ""sex/gender distinction;"" histories and politics of the term ""rape;"" political representation, the juridical and the nation-state in the contexts of religious and cultural differences around practices such as veiling, circumcision/genital mutilation; and questions of labor, prostitution and sex work. The course draws on work in French Feminist Theory, Queer Theory, Postcolonial Studies, Psychoanalysis, Continental Philosophy, Cultural Anthropology, and Diaspora Studies. Readings will include texts by Gayle Rubin, Luce Irigaray, Elizabeth Grosz, Simone de Beauvoir, Ranjana Khanna, Monique Wittig, Judith Butler, Gayatri Spivak, Sigmund Freud, Friedreich Engels, Shulamith Firestone, Alexandra Kollontai, Emma Goldman, bell hooks, Karen Engle, Catherine McKinnon, Drucilla Cornell, Ratna Kapur, Sarah Franklin, Daniel Boyarin, Henry Louis Gates, Anne Fausto-Sterling, Shoshana Felman, Saba Mahmood, Diana Fuss, and Chandra Mohanty.

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: $15.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"By gaining exposure to theatrical techniques, students will learn how to craft bold works of fiction with rich, believable characters. Drawing on the work of theater practitioners such as Sanford Meisner and Viola Spolin, this activity-based course will involve daily individual and collaborative writing exercises that teach students to orient themselves within fictional worlds through heightened sensory awareness and instill a practice of exploring character through desires and objectives. The goals are to provide a set of tools that enable students to express the inner complexity of a wide-range of characters through action and nuanced, realistic dialogue. 

This is a writing-intensive course. Short writing assignments will challenge students to put into practice the techniques we have experimented with in class, and each student will craft two short stories that will be workshopped and revised. In addition, we will read between 10-15 short stories, and students will compose weekly reading responses that allow them to examine how character development relates to other fictional strategies such as plot, backstory, point of view, and tone. Evaluation is based on participation in class activities, successful completion of all minor and major writing assignments, and the ability to provide constructive feedback during workshop experiences. 

Level: Introductory/Intermediate.  Prerequisites: Permission of instructor.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: None."
"This course introduces students to the techniques, methods, and history of the depiction of the human figure through direct observational drawing. We will be working from a live, nude model to investigate structure, anatomy, and the expressive nature of the human form through a variety of traditional and contemporary approaches. Students will also be trained to look at the figure abstractly through careful consideration of negative space surrounding the figure, siting parallel visual relationships across the body, and by considering lines of gravity as a horizontal and vertical axis for comparative analysis. They will also develop a rudimentary understanding of anatomy (artistically) through skeletal studies and muscle groups while developing both traditional and unconventional ways of seeing and drawing the figure. Students will expand and refine their observational skills, become proficient with a variety of drawing media and understand how these concerns overlap to create representational images. Understanding the integration of formal elements of drawing and how they are combined to achieve a sense of solidity, proportion, gravity, and animation when representing the human figure are our primary concern. Evaluation will be based on active physical and verbal participation in both work and in-class discussions or critiques, an increased proficiency to accurately represent the human form, individually designed projects, experimentation with drawing media. A final digital portfolio of work and self-evaluation is required. 

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $100.  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS"
"This course introduces students to the techniques, methods, and history of the depiction of the human figure through direct observational drawing. We will be investigating movement, volume, and anatomy of the human form through a variety of traditional and contemporary approaches. We will learn perspective to draw the figure in space. The space will be wherever the students are living and all that it contains, transforming a period of confinement and difficult circumstances into ART. The figures might be themselves, people with whom they live, family members, or pets. Students will be given assignments and documents such as illustrations of anatomy, references to art history and artists' works. An online blog will allow students to post pictures of their work for review, critique and guidance. Evaluation will be based on active participation in class discussions or critiques, an increased proficiency to accurately represent the human form, individually designed projects, and experimentation with drawing media. These visual memoirs will be showcased at COA at a later date.

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: none. Meets the following degree requirements: ADS"
"This hands-on course will explore sound composition, editing, and mixing to create soundtracks for video and/or film.  Students who take this course must have a background in music composition and/or sound and video production in order to collaborate on creative video/sound projects.  Sound recordings will include music and voice as well as everyday sounds and special sound effects.  The class will incorporate a number of group projects as well as individual exercises to illustrate sound recording and mixing strategies. We will also study sound in relation to video/film through readings and screenings.  In addition to class assignments, students will start developing sound tracks for their independent projects.  Students will be evaluated on their success in creating compositions, recordings, and mixes for video/film projects; and their ability to bring together moving pictures with a soundtrack to create a whole that is more than the sum of its parts.  Students will also be evaluated on their participation in class discussions and exercises.

Level: Intermediate/advanced.  Prerequisites: Background in music composition and/or sound and video production.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $40.  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS"
"Business, like all disciplines, has its own language. Being able to speak the language of business is critical for activists, social entrepreneurs and business owners alike. Financial statements are a key component of this language. These statements measure the fiscal health of both non-profit and for-profit organizations. They provide insight into all areas of the company.  They are a powerful tool for determining investments, competitive positioning and have extraordinary impacts on all of an organization's stakeholders. Unfortunately, most people, including many who run a wide variety of organizations, fail to grasp this language. In doing so, they undermine their organization's opportunity for success, as well as create obstacles to using business as a means of social change. Without guidance, looking at these financial statements is similar to examining hieroglyphics for the first time. Starting from a basic level and layering in complexity, the course will seek to demystify these statements in a way that is informative and unintimidating. In addition, time will be spent advancing students' understanding and familiarity with spreadsheets.

Topics of the course will include:  Creating and analyzing cash flow statements, profit and loss statements, balance sheets, as well as common sized income statements; Differentiating between each type of financial statement; Relating these statements to each other, tying them together and varying statements depending on business models; Comparing non-profit and for-profit financial statements and approaches; Examining key financial ratios and how they are different for different businesses; and Spreadsheet management and design. By the end of the class students will create their own financial statements and analyze a business through various financial statements. This class is positioned within the business program to provide the students' skills for business plan projections, exploring investing, general management, leadership or other finance courses. Students will be evaluated on class participation, projects, presentations and other criteria.

Level: Intermediate. Class limit: 15. Lab fee: $30.  Meets the following degree requirements: QR"
"What is “faith ?” What assumptions do “faithful” people make about themselves, others, the world, and the sacred ? How do people interpret sacred texts ? How might faith help people find identity and belonging, and (conversely), how might faith lead to exclusion ? How does faith guide life decisions, and how do such decisions – particularly ones that involve alleviating suffering, pursuing justice, or promoting sustainability – reflect faith ? How does faith engage the inevitability of death ? Faith shapes many aspects of human life. While critiques of faith often focus on its potential for harm (particularly violence and oppression), this course aims to swim in the opposite direction, seeking to understand the dynamics of faith that can lead to lives of meaning, purpose, belonging, or advocacy. We’ll explore philosophical, psychological, ecological, communal, and even some political dimensions of faith. And we’ll engage a variety of real-life people for whom faith is a meaningful and relevant – and central – aspect of their lives. Students of all faith traditions and perspectives are welcome – including students who do not identify with any particular tradition. Field trips to various faith-based institutions will be offered to allow for immersion experiences. Course texts may include works such as Alastair McIntosh’s Soil and Soul, Jim Wallis’ The False White Gospel, Karen Armstrong’s The Case for God, Zora Neal Hurston’s Moses, Man of the Mountain, or Kathy Baldock’s Forging a Sacred Weapon / Walking the Bridgeless Canyon, along with shorter articles relevant to the course. Sacred texts will be primarily Hebrew and Christian scriptures, with texts from other traditions according to student interest.

In addition to robust class discussions marked by curiosity and respect, and regularly-assigned readings of both primary and secondary sources, students can anticipate short / reflective writing assignments along with a final paper. Assessment will be based on evidence that the student has completed assignments and readings, and active and meaningful participation in seminar discussions.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 15. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"This course is designed to engage students in a student-centered, active learning environment focused on learning about wildland fire management. Classes will be a mix of lecture, discussion and hands-on practice with the tools and techniques of wildland fire management. Field trips to view prescribed fire operations and prescribed fire unit preparation will take place if/when opportunities and conditions permit. Assigned readings will be a basis for class discussion. Students are expected to keep up with assigned readings and come to class prepared to discuss them. Assessment will be in the form of basic comprehension tests, a midterm problem set and a more extensive final project. Opportunities for students to build upon this class are plentiful given wildland fire's ecological, social and political importance. 

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 14.  Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: none."
"Downeast Maine, from the Penobscot River east to the Canadian border, includes Hancock and Washington Counties, a region of extremes between high levels of tourism, like Mount Desert Island, and many coastal towns that are heavily reliant on fisheries for their economic existence. This long history of cultural and economic dependence on fisheries makes the region particularly vulnerable to fisheries decline, such as the collapse of the sardine and cod fisheries. Recent trends in the lobster, clam, scallop, and elver fisheries, as well as aquaculture, show various levels of instability and risk. At the same time, numerous initiatives in the region focus on revitalizing and stabilizing fisheries, while enhancing community resilience. This class uses a variety of interdisciplinary approaches to examine the relationships among marine resources, fisheries policy, harvesters, and communities. In this course, we will examine the relationships within this linked social-ecological system, and use historical data, current documents, interviews and oral histories to examine the human-ecological relationships among residents, policy, and resources. We also will examine relationships between other industries, uses, and values placed on the coast and their relationships to fisheries and aquaculture. The course will include guest speakers and field trips (including an overnight to the Cobscook Bay area) to Downeast communities. Evaluation will be based on several assignments during the term, including journals, analysis of oral histories, and research on a Downeast fishery. Students will also work on a final project examining a research question using multiple information sources and ways of knowing with a presentation due at the end of the term. Active engagement during class, with guest speakers, and on field trips will be expected.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: A class in anthropology, marine biology, fisheries, food systems, social science research methods, or environmental policy, or permission of instructor. Class limit: 15. Lab fee: $100. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"Downeast Maine, from the Penobscot River east to the Canadian border, includes Hancock and Washington Counties, a region of extremes between high levels of tourism, like Mount Desert Island, and many coastal towns that are heavily reliant on fisheries for their economic existence. This long history of cultural and economic dependence on fisheries makes the region particularly vulnerable to fisheries decline, such as the collapse of the sardine and cod fisheries. Recent trends in the lobster, clam, scallop, and elver fisheries, as well as aquaculture, show various levels of instability and risk. At the same time, numerous initiatives in the region focus on revitalizing and stabilizing fisheries, while enhancing community resilience. This class uses a variety of inter-disciplinary approaches to examine the relationships among marine resources, fisheries policy, harvesters, and communities. We are interested in examining the relationships within this linked social-ecological system, and use historical data, current documents, interviews and oral histories to examine the human-ecological relationships among residents, policy, and resources. We also will examine new economic initiatives in these communities, including ecotourism, aquaculture, and renewable energy. We have several individuals coming to campus to discuss issues with the class, and we will take several field trips (including an overnight to the Cobscook Bay area) to Downeast communities.  Evaluation will be based on several assignments during the term, including an oral history, sets of essay questions, and research on a fishery. Students will also work on a small-group project examining a research question using multiple methodologies, with a presentation and paper due at the end of the term. Active engagement during class, with guest speakers, and on field trips will be expected.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate.  Prerequisites: A class in anthropology, marine biology, fisheries, or environmental policy, and permission of instructor.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee:  $100. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"This course will be an in depth exploration of contemporary flashpoint issues involving the design, administration, and regulation of politics and elections in the United States. We will examine a series of contemporary controversies by examining their history, the stakeholders involved, and the pros and cons of the relevant alternative reform measures that have been proposed. Topics covered in a given term will vary based on changing external factors such as the timing of elections as well as student interests. Likely areas that may be covered include: campaign finance reform, gerrymandering, instant runoff voting, election technologies, voter suppression, alternative governmental models, the electoral college, party primaries, campaign communication regulation, government funding of elections, nationalization of election standards, etc..  While the emphasis of the class will be on the US context, we will often draw on international case studies as comparative reference points to assist in evaluating possible policy alternatives. The course will follow a collaborative laboratory model with students dividing into teams to research and present briefings throughout the term.  In addition to this workshop emphasis there will be a common weekly discussion of a salient election related topic or theme. Students will be evaluated based on their participation in and engagement with the solutions workshop, the various presentations and written reports produced by their team, short form individual response papers related  to the common discussion topics, and required meetings with the instructor. The course is open to students of all interests, and familiarity with the US political system is not a prerequisite. Students should see this course as a good starting point to both familiarize themselves with various aspects of American politics while also providing them the opportunity to work on crafting a focused policy proposal that responds to a contemporary political controversy. It also serves as an excellent building block for students wishing to take more advanced classes in the areas of politics, policy, law, and advocacy. 

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 14.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"In this performance-based class, students will work together to learn and perform traditional folk music, both in small groups and as a large ensemble. Styles will be guided by student interest and may include New England, Québécois, Cape Breton, Scottish, Irish, Old Time, Bluegrass, and others. Instrumentation may include (but is not limited to) fiddle, keyboard, guitar, banjo, mandolin, bouzouki, ukulele, dulcimer, bass, cello, accordion, concertina, pipes, flute, whistle, vocals, harp, and percussion. Tunes will primarily be taught “by ear,” although notation will be available as well. Throughout the term, students will play and interact with experienced folk music practitioners representing various styles and instruments. The class will include participation in informal local song sessions and will culminate in a final performance.

How will students in this course be evaluated?: Assessment of student work will be based on contributions to rehearsals and discussions, participation in sessions and performances, weekly reflections, and a research project on a tune of interest.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: Students should have some experience playing their instrument and should have reliable access to their instrument of choice. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: $40. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"It feels like pizza has always been considered American, but we know that it was originally brought to the US by Italian immigrants. Both the US and Italy claim pizza as a national dish, and this type of debate about where food comes from—and who it belongs to—is highly connected to our national and local identities. As humans continue to migrate across borders and blur the boundaries in digital spaces, our identities continue to develop as we interact with each other and different types of food. We will consider how this movement shapes our ideas of ‘foreign’ and ‘local’ and how one becomes the other, as well as the line between honoring a culture and appropriating it.

We will examine the intersections of the genre conventions, rhetorical situation, and the writers’ identities to understand how these elements work together when producing texts. We will learn key composition concepts (genre, rhetorical situation, and multimodality) and support the
development of your genre research skills. We will use these concepts and conduct genre research to examine various food writing genres, such as narratives, recipes, and social media posts to understand how writing is an activity that goes beyond putting words together on a piece
of paper. These activities will support your overall genre research skills and deepen your understanding of writing, which can be transferred to other writing activities beyond this course. Classes will be based on genre analysis activities and group discussions. We will read works that address food writing genres and identity, and we will watch documentaries that explore the intersections of food, identity, and migration. Course assignments include your reproduction of a food writing genre, weekly reading responses, reflections and narratives to document your learning trajectory, which will also be used for assessment purposes.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS, W."
"Food systems have long been globalized and interconnected. Consequently, conflict in one part of the world often affects food systems in other parts of the world. Indeed, some scholars have argued that war has made our contemporary food systems. In this course, we will draw on the fields of food studies, history, anthropology, international studies, and political science to understand how war has shaped and been shaped by past and contemporary food systems. Designed as a two part course, Food & War Part I focuses on World War I, World War II, and the Cold War between the United States, the Soviet Union, and their respective allies. We will also examine the influence of the Cold War on efforts to bring about a “green revolution” across Asia in the 1950s and 1960s and across Africa today. Throughout the term we will consider how modern war tactics have evolved from historical approaches to conflict, from burning and salting fields to slaughtering livestock and wild game. As a reading and discussion based course, we will primarily examine our topic through books and peer-reviewed articles as we consider the questions: How has food been used as both a weapon of war and a tool of diplomacy? How has conflict transformed the ways people grow, harvest, and eat food? And how have agricultural methods, inputs, technologies, and cuisines spread and evolved in relationship to war? Students will be evaluated based on preparation for and participation in class discussions; a series of synthesis papers; and a final paper. As an intermediate seminar, this course is best suited for students who have taken a course in food studies such as Transforming Food Systems or U.S. Farm & Food Policy, and who have had at least one course in history, anthropology, or international studies. Students who take Food & War Part I are not required to take Part II.

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: This course is best suited for students who have taken a course in food studies such as Transforming Food Systems or U.S. Farm & Food Policy, and who have had at least one course in history, anthropology, or international studies. Class limit: 16.  Lab fee: $0.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"This class is a study of, and a writing workshop in, poetic forms.  We will look at constraints, techniques, and directions of contemporary poetry through intensive reading, writing, and criticism of our own poetic work.  This background is useful and significant for the study of poetry at any level, and is especially helpful in light of the fact that, for better or worse, free verse techniques have dominated poetry in the twentieth century.  This course is valuable for practiced poets, emerging poets, and prose writers alike. Forms of Poetry asks students to pay attention, create poetry of attention, and revel in poetry that is attentive to language; this process will help students develop voice and lyrical content in their own writing. We will look older, “received forms” (Sonnet, Ghazal, Villanelle) and create our own forms by using experimental techniques (homophonic translation, concrete poetry, erasure, nonsense words (i.e. Jabberwocky)) and look to end the term with the amazing Japanese form, Zuihitsu. You might be thinking: Why write with these crazy constraints or in these old timey poetic forms? And what the heck is a Zuihitsu? Those are good questions, questions we will address on a weekly basis.  Over the last seventy years, the debates over poetic expression have been shaped in visceral ways, from “raw” versus “cooked,” “academic” versus “beat,” “formal” versus “antiformal.”  This class is designed to deepen your knowledge of these debates and to inspire you to draw upon a variety of modes in your own writing.  Evaluations:  Students will be expected to contribute to a class blog, write several poems a week, revise poetic output, participate in class workshop, and hand sew a chapbook of their own revised, creative work. 

Level: Introductory/Intermediate.  Prerequisites: none.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: none.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"This class gives students an opportunity to investigate time-based art.  4-D art draws on the vast and varied traditions of theatre, dance, media, and music, often crossing boundaries to create hybrid works.  This course will focus on concepts and processes related to representing and experiencing events that take place in time.  Strategies for planning, proposing, and producing work individually or collaboratively will be discussed and practiced.  Some class periods will be workshop in style, and include physical and vocal exercises and improvisations.  The course will include basic instruction and use of video cameras and sound recording devices.  A majority of the learning in this studio course will happen as students make projects and reflect on their work and the work of others.  Documentation and information about contemporary and historic time-based art will be presented.  Students will be evaluated based on imaginative exploration of ideas and materials, extent and depth of work processes and research, completion of assigned projects, and participation in class discussions. 

Level: Introductory.  Lab Fee $30.00. Class limit: 12. Meets the following degree requirements: ADS"
"This course is a history of Latin America from Native American contact cultures through the contemporary period covering socio-political processes.  An emphasis is placed on the fusion of pre-contact societies into a new socio-cultural formation in the colonial period, and then the shared yet divergent history of the region after the collapse of colonial rule.  In the second half the class emphasizes the rise of the nation state in Latin America with particular emphasis on dictatorship and rebellions.  The course uses traditional texts, novels, and film to explore this huge geographical and chronological expanse.

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: none.  Class limit: 20.  Lab fee: none.  Meets the following degree requirements: HY HS"
"Despite uniform rules of development, seed plants exhibit an incredible range of forms including succulent cacti, bug-eating sundews, dainty annuals, and leafless parasites.  These differences in form often are correlated with habitat and life history parameters such as nutrient and water availability, herbivores, light quality, and modes of perennation.  In this course we begin by examining the morphological development and organization of seed plants from inception in the seed to reproductive maturity.  With this general developmental framework, we then examine whole plant and organ level patterns of variation, modification, and ecological specialization that underlie the variation in form observed today.  Evaluations are based on laboratory quizzes, paper, midterm, and final exam.  

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisites:  Biology: Cellular Processes of Life or permission of instructor.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: $25.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES"
"This is an introductory drawing course. Students will work primarily from direct observation to translate what they are seeing onto paper using dry and wet media. In their drawings, students will learn how to articulate a broad range of values in charcoal and investigate how tone and line can communicate a sense of space and form. Students will learn sighting and measurement techniques to translate relative proportions across their compositions. A broad range of ideas about composition and organization of forms will be introduced by engaging with the work of artists from different parts of the world throughout history. Students will work with a variety of materials and techniques: from charcoal to ink to using collage to deconstruct and then rebuild spaces.
Evaluation will be based on the completion of exercises and assignments in a way that demonstrates an understanding of the concepts and ideas introduced in the class, engagement with course materials, participation in discussions and critiques, and the ability to respond to feedback in one’s work.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 13. Lab fee: $80. Meets the following degree requirements: ADS."
"In this course, students will be introduced to the basic aspects involved in the process of translating what they are observing in space onto two-dimensional surfaces in oil paint. Students will be introduced to the basics of color theory, mixing and matching colors, and also explore how color can change depending on context. Through the assignments we will investigate how form, volume, space and light can be captured in paint. Students will learn how to build their own frames and stretch and prepare canvases for painting and develop a studio practice, which includes cleaning and maintenance of brushes, the palette and other tools. A broad range of ideas and concerns in painting throughout history, from various parts of the world will be introduced in the class. In the last part of the term, different aspects of composition will be discussed: the way colors and shapes can work together to create an integrated image. Assignments will include quick paintings as well as paintings that are made over the course of multiple class sessions. The assignments over the course of the term will build students’ confidence in translating what’s in front of them, which makes the task of taking on the images in their heads, the images they are interested in, less daunting.
Students will learn how to look at and analyze their peers’ work and provide them with constructive feedback during critiques. Previous drawing experience at high school or college level is strongly recommended. Evaluation will be based on how the specific criteria set for each assignment are met, participation and engagement during critiques, and receptivity to feedback.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisite: None, but previous drawing experience at high school or college level is strongly recommended. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: $120. Meets the following degree requirements: ADS."
"This course will incorporate modeling with clay, figure drawing, and understanding of human anatomy. Students will be introduced to the visual language: line, form, texture, value, color, and the understanding of a solid mass in space. They will study individual features in clay, learn the basics of the human figure, proportions, anatomical structure, and how it constitutes a whole. Students will be challenged to make decisions as they work to express their perspective and personal interpretation, culminating in a life size portrait in clay. This class will also involve sketching from a live model, drawing the full forms, learning about movement, volume, and composition. Evaluation will be based on completion of projects, participation in class, individual and group critiques.

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $100.  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS"
"This winter, students will collaboratively research and stage a production of César Alvarez and the Lisps’ Futurity (2015), a work of musical theater about two people dreaming of a technological utopia during one of the darkest periods of American history. The musical looks back to the Civil War to raise contemporary questions about the role of technology in visions for liberation. The “thinking machine” at the center of Futurity asks us to consider the merger of human and machine in today’s technological age. Our staging of the production will benefit from the collaboration of electroacoustic sculptor Mark Dixon, whose novel musical instruments will feature in the role of the “Steam Brain,” the “thinking machine” that Futurity’s protagonists hope will bring an end to human suffering. Evaluation will be based on demonstrated engagement with all course elements and materials, and successful navigation and contributions to the shared production project. Students interested in being a part of the performing ensemble (actors, singers, musicians), and/or those interested in set, lighting and sound design, stage management, dramaturgy, etc. are encouraged to apply. To be considered, students must complete the questionnaire provided via email by the end of week 5, Fall term. This intensive process will result in a run of performances at the end of the Winter term. The course counts for 3 full credits and requires a considerable time commitment. The default grading option is credit/no credit. If a letter grade is desired, it would need to be requested by the student. 

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: Experience in acting, music, stage direction, etc. will be helpful.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $150.  Meets the following degree requirements: AD."
"In critically examining existing global economic models, we will use case studies from India that draw on the lens of Gandhian Economics and ways to remake society through green entrepreneurship. We will focus on ideas that bring ethics to the forefront of the enterprise creation process, drawing, especially, on ideas of J. C. Kumarappa. We will look closely at ways in past societies, cultural ethos guided enterprise and how there is a need to re-create / revive these to ensure sustainability. Extensive examples will be provided from my own research work on the rural local institutions that manage large enterprises in India. These will be compared as well with the successes and challenges, in Gandhi’s time, of the village industries movement for which Kumarappa was the chief architect. We will explore the successes as well as challenges in examples of how green entrepreneurship is manifesting within the market paradigm of today in contemporary India. The initial 2 weeks of class will be in person and then online sessions will be used to allow for engaging with entrepreneurs on the ground in India. Assignments for the course will include short reflective writings and a term project. Criteria for evaluation will be based on the extent to which student writing and class participation demonstrate close familiarity with the readings and a thoughtful, collaborative, critical engagement with the ideas developed in the course.  

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: $25.  Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"This class offers a good foundation of knowledge for a gardener to begin the process of organic gardening, as well as an understanding of what defines organic gardening.  The information presented focuses on soil fertility and stewardship, the ecology of garden plants, soil and insects, and practical management of the above.  The garden is presented as a system of dynamic interactions.  Emphasis is given to vegetable crops and soil fertility.  Laboratories include soil analysis, tree pruning, seedling establishment, weed and insect identification, garden design, covercropping, composting, and reclamation of comfrey infested area.  Evaluations are based on participation in class and lab, written class work, exam, and final individual garden design.

Level:  Introductory.  Pre-requisite: Permission of the Instructor. Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: $25.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES"
"This course is one of three courses required to be taken together. The three courses make up a ""monster course"" with the overall title ""The Story of Humans in Maine Told Through Sediment"".In this course, students will learn the fundamentals of gas chromatography mass spectrometry (GC-MS). We will study the separation of mixtures by Gas Chromatography, the ionization of compounds, and the interpretation/identification of compounds by fragmentation patterns. Students will learn how to integrate analyte peaks in comparison to internal standards in order to quantify them. Students will be evaluated on participation in laboratory exercises, through problem sets (identification of unknown spectra), and by demonstrating proficiency on the GC-MS instrument. 

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Co-requisites: ES2051 Captured in Sediment: The Peopling of Maine and ES2053 The Analytical Chemistry of Paleoecology. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: ES."
"Why do fairy tales capture the attention of adults and children all over the world and endure in popular literary and cinematic forms?  What do they reveal to psychologists, biologists, historians, linguists, artists, anthropologists, and educators?  Do they politicize or de-politicize? socialize or subvert?  What is the postfeminist, postmodern response to the Brothers Grimm?  What do fairy tales convey about animal behavior, entomology, and cosmology?  How might the tales shape human limitations, moral values, and aspirations? This course will explore the storytelling and re-telling of literary, cultural, and scientific stories from a comparative perspective, imagining their interpretations and how they may be re-told with an eye toward new understandings of human interrelationships, of a given sociohistorical moment, the culture of COA, and the larger culture. Students will read folklore and fairy tales, view several films, and discuss essays by writers such as Cristina Bacchilega, Bruno Bettelheim, Ruth Bottigheimer, Michel Butor, Italo Calvino, Robert Darnton, Claude Lévi-Strauss, Maria Tatar, and Jack Zipes.  Contemporary works by writers, visual artists, and musicians inspired by traditional tales will also be explored. Writers may include Margaret Atwood, A.S. Byatt, Angela Carter, Robert Coover, Michael Cunningham, Neil Gaiman, Tanith Lee, Naguib Mahfouz, Haruki Murakami, Helen Oyeyemi, Ludmilla Petrushevskaya, Francine Prose, and Anne Sexton.  Reflections may center on recurrent motifs and patterns; and social, sexual, moral, scientific and political content, with emphasis on race, gender, and class structure.  Students will be evaluated on two short papers; one creative project that may be expressed in writing, visual art, music, or dance; and a final written assignment in any genre—poems, plays, fiction or nonfiction.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None.. Class limit: 12.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"This course will explore the many roles that genes play in the biology of organisms, the molecular basis of gene function, and the methodologies used in genetic research and application.  Students in this course should already have a basic understanding from an introductory biology course of the structure and function of genes and chromosomes, the processes involved in gene expression, and patterns of inheritance.  This course will explore these phenomena more deeply as well as delve into a range of other topics, including population genetics, quantitative genetics, genes in development, genomics, and using genetic data to understand human evolution.  We will also discuss the use of genetic engineering in industry, agriculture, medicine, and research.  We will meet twice weekly for lectures and once per week for discussion of readings and problem sets.  Evaluation is based on short problem sets, take-home exams, an oral presentation, and a final paper.  

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisite: Successful completion of Biology: Cellular Processes of Life or permission of instructor. Class limit: 16. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: ES"
"Students will explore the differences and similarities between genocides and ethnic cleansings; why people join resistance groups; why other countries intervene or fail to intervene to stop genocide; and whether post genocide reconciliation is effective. The course will focus on several genocides or ethnic cleansings from different parts of the globe: for example, toward American Indians in the US, Chinese in Nanking, Jews, Roma and others during the Holocaust, Muslims in Bosnia & Herzegovina and Tutsi people (and a smaller number of Hutus) in Rwanda. Students will be evaluated based on short written responses to readings, in class discussion, two papers and a final project. The final project will explore the topics in the course through fiction, poetry, art, film, advocacy, interviews or other forms of expression. The course readings will be a mix of scholarly writing about genocide, first person accounts and perhaps some fiction and poetry. We will also watch and discuss videos. Class sessions will involve discussions with all of us together and also in small group discussions between students. The focus on both resistance and reconciliation are important in their own right but also will provide the students and me with the opportunity to temper the highly disturbing material on genocide by focusing on the remarkable courage of individuals both during and after genocide has run its course.

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: $20. Meets the following degree requirement: HS."
"As someone who writes every day, you have probably noticed that it’s more common to text LOL to a friend, as opposed to writing “LOL things were busy” when emailing to ask a professor for an extension on a paper. Similarly, you probably expect this course description to include certain information about the course rather than tips for becoming a viral sensation on TikTok. Why do these differences exist? What is the point of knowing the differences? And how is this relevant to writing?

In this course, you will explore different kinds of writing (genres) to understand how the context shapes the way we write. The explorations of various everyday, academic, and professional genres will help refine the rhetorical skills that you already have and develop your awareness of how writing is used in different contexts. The goal is to build your knowledge of writing and make your repertoire of languages and literacies visible so you can transfer these skills and write in other courses and non-academic settings.

The class activities will provide you with many hands-on opportunities to explore and analyze writing in a collaborative setting with your peers in small and large group activities. You will complete inquiry-based projects to examine different genres and reflect on your evolving understanding of writing. Your learning will be evaluated based on these assignments and activities. By the end of the course, you will have developed the language to talk about writing and built the skills, agency, and confidence to engage in different kinds of writing activities in academia and beyond.

Level: Introductory. Class Limit: 16. Lab Fee: None. Prerequisites: None. Meets the following degree requirements: W."
"Ever-rising numbers of people and their impact on the Earth's finite resources could lead to disaster, not only for wildlife and ecosystems but also for human populations. As researchers gather and publish more data, GIS becomes vital to graphically revealing the inter-relationships between human actions and environmental degradation. Much of what threatens the earth and its inhabitants is placed-based. Solutions require tools to help visualize these places and prescribe solutions.  This is what GIS is about. Built on digital mapping, geography, databases, spatial analysis, and cartography, GIS works as a system to enable people to better work together using the best information possible. For these reasons, some level of competency is often expected for entry into many graduate programs and jobs, particularly in natural resources, planning and policy, and human studies. The flow of this course has two tracts, technical and applied. The course begins with training in the basics of the technology. Then, skills are applied to projects that address real-world issues. Project work composes the majority of course work and each student has the opportunity to develop their own project. Because GIS provides tools to help address many kinds of issues, GIS lends itself well to the theory of thinking globally and acting locally. Projects often utilize the extensive data library for the Acadia region developed by students since the lab was founded in 1988. The GIS Lab acts as a service provider to outside organizations and students can tap into the resources of a broad network of groups and individuals working towards a more sustainable future. Course evaluations are partially based on the on-time completion of exercises and problem sets. Most of the evaluation is based on critique of student independent final project work and related documentation.

Level:  Introductory/Intermediate,   Pre-requisites: Basic computer literacy.  Class Limit: 10.  Lab Fee: $75. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"In this course we will explore how geology has played a major role in human history and culture over multiple temporal and spatial scales. We will explore the underlying geological processes forming and influencing our environment and how this relates to human migration and settlement patterns, political boundaries, geohazards, resources, the modern landscape, and agriculture. This course will appeal to students interested in exploring connections between geology and other subject areas, or who are curious about humanity's place in geologic time.  This course will implement readings from a range of sources: geologic textbooks, excerpts from short historical texts, and scientific journal articles. We will use class time in a variety of ways: lecture-based, seminar-style discussion, and laboratories spent visiting local field sites.  Students will be evaluated based on their performance on weekly problem sets or writing assignments, a midterm quiz, as well as a term project with both oral and written presentation components. 

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: none.  Class limit: 16.  Lab fee: none. Meets the following degree requirements: ES"
"This course is designed to introduce students to geological concepts, tools of the trade, and to the geological history of Mount Desert Island. Throughout the course, students will learn skillsets (topographic and geologic map reading, orienteering, field observation, note taking, field measurements) and geologic principles (rock types, stratigraphy, plate tectonics, earth systems, geologic time, surface processes) both in the classroom and in the field. We will conduct multiple short field excursions on MDI and one extended weekend field trip to explore the regional geology. Students will submit a term project complete with their own field data, maps, photos, and analysis of the local and regional geology. Students will be evaluated on the term project, short quizzes, additional written assignments and lab reports. Offered every fall. 

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: none. Class limit: 14.  Lab Fee: $50.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES"
"In this introductory geoscience course students will learn foundational principles and concepts such as plate tectonics, geologic time, climate and weather, rocks and minerals, and surface processes through an exploration of some of the National Parks of the United States. Through virtual field trips of various parks, students will visualize how regional climate and surface processes such as rivers, glaciers, and wind interact with the bedrock and surficial materials to produce some of the most iconic landscapes. While Acadia National Park offers a view of an ancient and eroded supervolcano, Yellowstone offers a glimpse of a dynamic landscape built on a modern supervolcano. While a few glaciers still cling to the high peaks of Glacier National Park, Yosemite hosts steep glacially carved valleys and polished domes reminiscent of a glaciated past. Class time will be used for lectures, discussions of readings, and laboratory exercises. During labs, students will get to know approximately 6 different parks in detail through interaction with geologic maps, rock samples, aerial imagery, and scientific reports. The students will be evaluated based on laboratory exercises and a final project through which students will explore one park of their choosing.

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: none.  Class limit: 16.  Lab fee: none.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES"
"Glaciers are rapidly retreating around the planet and predicted to continue this trend in the coming centuries. The decline of the world’s ice sheets and mountain glaciers will impact sea level, infrastructure, and fresh-water resources for communities around the world. To put current changes into a long-term geologic context, students will learn the processes, landforms, and impact of glaciers on the Earth's surface as the planet has cycled through ice ages. This course is designed to provide students with a solid understanding of the dynamic interactions between ice, climate, landscapes, and humans over varying spatial and temporal scales. In addition, we will cover the basics of glaciology and the physics that influence the structure, size, and movement of ice. Through class discussions and assigned problem sets, students will reinforce the content covered in lectures. In addition, this course will give students hands-on experience with tools and methods commonly used to study glaciers and ice sheets (such as: ground-penetrating radar, LiDAR, rock sampling for cosmogenic analysis). This course will have various field trips during class time on Mount Desert Island to explore how an ice sheet shaped the region’s landscape during the Last Glacial Maximum. Students will be evaluated on weekly problem sets and readings and a final project and presentation related to this history of glaciation in Maine.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 14. Lab fee: $50. Meets the following degree requirements: ES."
"Two international treaties, the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and the Paris Agreement, are the legal architecture for global cooperation to address climate change. The national governments that are signatories to the treaties gather yearly at the Conference of the Parties (COP) to negotiate the implementation of the agreements. A large number of non-governmental actors also attend the meetings, including many from civil society and social movements who are there to pressure governments to act with the speed and scale necessary to address the growing climate crisis. This course is an introduction to both these treaties and the global politics surrounding their implementation. In the course, students will gain strong foundational historical, legal, and political knowledge of both of the treaties and the intergovernmental processes of treaty implementation. Through a focus on politically contested issues within the negotiations, students will be introduced to a range of the civil society organizations and social movements that engage in the global politics of climate change, and their politics, strategies, and tactics. Course material will include primary documents from negotiations, civil society documents, and conversations with key actors. Evaluation in the class will be based on class participation, several problem sets, and a final individual or group project.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 20. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: HS."
"The terms globalization and anti-globalization are often used to refer to increasing cultural homogeneity across the globe, but also to growing familiarity with multiple forms of diversity and intercultural exchange. These terms also reference notions of progress and development, but also increasing poverty and inequality. In this course, we will look at how historical perspectives of the forces of globalization -- including capitalism, European modernity and its colonial histories -- shape contemporary understandings of and debates over immigration, labor, gender and ethnic difference, national boundaries and their transgression, the law, justice and human rights. We will think critically about concepts such as agency, freedom, and even the notion of the human itself. Relatedly, this course will challenge you to think about the implications of how difference – national, gender, ethnic, and otherwise - is understood in terms of globalization for political problems such as war, poverty, environmental destruction, sexual violence, imperialism, and freedom of movement and expression. Over the course of the term, we will examine how human relations in specific locales are shaped through economic and cultural exchanges, mass media, different forms of representation and changing means of mobility. To this end, we will draw on specific examples from African, European, Middle Eastern and Latin American contexts. This is an interdisciplinary course that draws on the fields of anthropology, literature, feminist theory, and postcolonial studies. In addition to academic texts, we will be reading from novels, engaging with film, and listening to music. Evaluation of students will be based on the following: informal reading responses, one mid-term paper and one final paper, and class participation. 

Level: Introductory. Pre-requisites: None. Class Limit: 15."
"The name of this course, ""Graphic Attack"", refers not only to the power of image and text within our visually saturated physical and virtual environments, but to the need to evaluate and respond critically to mass media. Students will explore and discuss the roles and responsibilities of designers as primary crafters of visual messages through promotion, advertising and identity design and investigate the work of artists and designers who appropriate tools of advertising to construct alternative messages outside of, and often in critique of, the commercial realm.
 
This advanced level studio art course combines critical examination of contemporary graphic design practice with studio projects in creative problem solving. Practice in design research, layout and composition, typography, digital imaging and text/image composition will be combined with hands-on studio projects in image generation such as block print, silkscreen, monoprint, instant photography, xerography and collage techniques.

Projects will range from investigations of personal identity and branding to advertising and package design in the retail and socio-political environments. Through studio visits, students will have an opportunity to meet professional artists and designers to discuss first hand process and ethical issues related to their work. Students will be evaluated on conceptual problem solving ability, effectiveness of design solutions, understanding and practice of the incremental process of design, timeliness and quality of work, and thoughtful participation in class discussion and critique.

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisites: Signature of instructor, Graphic Design Studio I.  Class limit: 12.  Lab Fee: $85  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS"
"Visual communication is one of the most pervasive means of communication between humans. Graphic design, in the realm of visual communication, is a process used to effectively convey ideas and information visually through print, electronic media, products in the marketplace, and structural elements in the built environment. Its application may be promotional, editorial, informational,
expositional or investigational. It may cater to, or critique, - commercialism, colonialism,
capitalism, and advertising – or alternately be used to organize information and visualize complex data, or concepts. Is it possible to construct a visual message that will be received through the din and noise of our overstuffed media environment? Past other competing messages? What are some of the contemporary issues surrounding design and the roles and responsibilities of graphic designers in the workplace and in their communities?

In this introductory level studio course, you will become familiar with visual rhetoric and the basic elements, principles, and processes of graphic design that will help you to construct effective visual messages. You will work on a variety of conceptual visual communication projects in the realms of information design, editorial design, and promotional design. Lectures, demonstrations, assignments, critiques, historical teachings, and visiting professionals will offer a balanced framework for developing skills in creative perception, critical thinking and visual  communication. An emphasis is placed on these elements and evaluation will be weighted more heavily in these areas than technical expertise on the computer. However, you will be required to learn the basics of several computer graphic applications (Adobe Photoshop, Adobe Illustrator, and Figma) in order to complete coursework. You will receive basic instruction in these programs in class, but will be expected to attend scheduled lab times, and refer to online resources and guide books for specific tools and techniques that may be required to visualize your ideas. Tutorial times outside of class will be provided periodically throughout the term for additional technical instruction.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 14. Lab fee: $85.  Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"Visual communication is one of the most pervasive means of human communication. Graphic design, within the realm of visual communication, is a process used to effectively convey ideas and information visually through print, electronic media, products in the marketplace, and structural elements in the built environment. Its application may be promotional, editorial, informational, expositional or instigational.  It may cater to, or critique -- commercialism, colonialism, capitalism, and advertising -- or alternately be used to organize information and visualize complex data, or concepts. Is it possible to construct a visual message that will be received through the din and noise of our overstuffed media environment?  Past other competing messages?  What are some of the contemporary issues surrounding design and the roles and responsibilities of graphic designers in the workplace and in their communities? 

In this introductory/intermediate level studio course you will become familiar with visual rhetoric and the basic elements, principles, and processes of graphic design that will help you to construct effective visual messages.  You will work on a variety of conceptual visual communication projects in the realms of information design, editorial design, and promotional design.  Lectures, demonstrations, assignments and critiques will offer a balanced framework for developing skills in creative perception, critical thinking and visual communication.  An emphasis is placed on these elements and evaluation will be weighted more heavily in these areas than technical expertise on the computer.  You will however, be required to learn the basics of several computer graphic applications (Adobe Photoshop, Adobe Illustrator, and Adobe InDesign and/or Quark) in order to complete coursework.  You will receive basic instruction in these programs in class, but will be expected to refer to computer manuals and guide books for specific tools and techniques that may be required to visualize your ideas.  

Level: Introductory/Intermediate.  Prerequisites: Introduction to Arts and Design or Two Dimensional Design I recommended.  Class limit: 14.  Lab fee: $85.  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS"
"This studio course offers students an opportunity for in-depth study of contemporary issues, applications and techniques in graphic design. Students will pursue conceptual problem solving through creative exercises and theoretical and applied studio projects. Particular emphasis will be placed on advancing skills in creative problem-solving, typography, layout, image generation and preparing art for print. Digital and hands-on methods (techniques such as block print) for image generation will be explored to create original illustrations. Projects will include typography and illustration exercises, identity design, environmental design and interpretive information design. Students will be encouraged to solicit a design project from the local community and produce it in the context of the class by engaging in the creative process from concept to production oversight during the course of the 10-week term. In addition to structured class assignments, students will have an opportunity to propose and pursue their own design projects. 
This class will be conducted in seminar/studio format. Emphasis will be placed on the design process - from creation to production, the timely completion of project phases, creative solutions and advancing skill in typography, layout and image generation. The detailed schedule will depend largely on the course make-up and individual project proposals.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced.  Prerequisites: Signature of Instructor, Graphic Design Studio 1.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $85. Meets the following degree requirements: ADS"
"Every day, we live, work, study, eat, play, relax and sleep in buildings. Americans spend ~87% of our time inside buildings. What makes a building sustainable? This course will be an exploration of green building concepts, materials, and best practices. We will use the US Green Building Council’s Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) certification process as a framework for understanding buildings, including their materials, energy use, water consumption, site location, occupant health, and interconnection with the surrounding community. LEED is the most widely used green building certification in the world, with more than 110,000 certified projects representing 24 billion square feet of building space.

This course will include field trips to local building projects and/or building material producers, presentation(s) from architects or design professionals, reading core LEED materials, independent research, and group projects. Students will apply their knowledge to building projects on or off campus. Students will be evaluated based on participation in class, completion of homework assignments and group projects/presentations. Students who complete this course will be prepared for the LEED Green Associate exam and certification ($100 cost to complete certification). This course is designed for students interested in construction, design, sustainability, community planning, climate resiliency, and touches on an array of other subject areas.

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisites: ES1056 Physics & Math of Sustainable Energy, or permission of instructor.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $50."
"Green Chemistry by definition strives to prevent pollution from the very beginning of a chemical process; however, this course will strive to teach much more. We will emphasize that ""chemists should have a moral or Hippocratic oath to the practice of their trade; one that states ""first, do no harm1."" As a result, students will examine ways to critically evaluate the design of chemicals for safe manufacture and use by industry and individual households. We will look to the past to learn from previous mistakes (ex. DDT, Thalidomide, Bisphenol-A) and try to understand and mitigate the unintended consequences of the chemicals we synthesize.  The course will be an intensive collaborative laboratory experience where students not only learn, but practice the 12 principles of Green Chemistry and Engineering. In the laboratory, students will work on all aspects of a synthesis project with the goal of preparing a publication at the conclusion of the term. Students will also work to develop safe, clean, and environmentally friendly laboratory experiments for integration into an advanced high school or undergraduate general chemistry curriculum. Students will be required to read and utilize a significant amount of scientific literature in the course. Evaluations are based on participation in classes and labs, homework assignments, two projects, and a single exam. 

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: Chemistry II. Class Limit: 15. Lab Fee: $0. Meets the following degree requirements: ES."
"This course is a fundamental study in guitar chord construction, note reading, chord symbol identification, fingerboard facility, theory as related to guitar and scale and mode work.  Students will develop a practice routine in order to attain introductory improvisational skills and basic facility in practical guitar performance. Intermediate students will expand their existing knowledge and skill in these areas. Assessment is based on class participation, reading, listening and notation assignments, and the development of a self-directed practice routine with specific goals, weekly practice tapes and a final performance. Students that play another stringed instrument are welcome but they will be responsible for translating the teachings to their instrument.

Students must provide their own instruments (acoustic or electric). 

Level: Introductory-Intermediate. Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $10.  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS"
"This course is an intensive study of Shakespeare's work from the point of view of the actor. Through text analysis, scene study, physical/vocal work and acting exercises, students explore the meaning, music and power in Shakespeare's words while developing their own strategies for performing the play effectively for contemporary audiences. The bulk of the work involves learning, staging and presenting key monologues and scenes from the play for
continued critique and revision. Students gain a clear understanding of the context in which the play was written but primarily focus on contemporary connections and discourse as well as a wide variety of old and new adaptations. Evaluation is based on participation in all class activities, readings and discussion, successful completion of all performance projects including productive rehearsal time alone and in groups, a portfolio of written responses and effective engagement with the shared class blog. Work will happen both on and off campus and includes the possibility of at least one field trip. Due to the nature of the work, please note the extended class block schedule.  

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: $75. Meets the following degree requirements: ADS."
"The Hatchery is applied Human Ecology in action; it offers students a bridge from coursework to actively creating their vision of the future. The Hatchery gives students from across the campus the opportunity to move from ideas to action. Hatchery students work either individually or in teams on a wide array of enterprises. Past projects have included: urban farming; international development; policy and planning; photography and film; alternative transportation; biofuel production; renewable energy; food systems; the arts; furniture production; technology development; social enterprise. Ventures have been for-profit and non-profit, encompassing the range from local businesses to scalable start-ups. Students selected for the Hatchery are required to devote an entire term to launching their venture. Each Hatchery enterprise, whether a team or an individual, must take the course for a minimum of three credits. Along with weekly instructional meetings, students receive office space, supplies, professional services, mentors and potential access to seed capital to develop their ventures. After the initial ten weeks of class, if students decide to continue their enterprises, they have access to the Hatchery space and resources for an additional nine months. 

The Hatchery takes place in three phases:
--Application:  Students apply for a position in the Hatchery over winter term. 
--Rapid Prototype:  The ten weeks of the Hatchery course. Students create a rapid prototype to test their ventures in the marketplace. These prototypes vary widely depending on the type of ventures.
--Creating an Enterprise Structure:  During the ten weeks of the course, students will have weekly assignments that introduce key elements in an organizational structure and highlight operational considerations that are universal amongst enterprises.
--Development:  The following 9-months. Students have access to the Hatchery space and resources to continue developing their enterprises. Grading is credit/no credit only.

Level: Advanced.  Prerequisites:  Permission of instructor.  Class limit: 8.  Lab fee: none. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"Students will learn what causes bias motivated violence in schools and communities, how to develop effective prevention strategies, how to reduce police violence toward traditionally targeted groups, and why hate crimes have such destructive impacts on individuals and communities. The course will focus on hate crimes and police and community response in the US and in Europe. The students will examine their own ethnic, racial, gender, sexual orientation and religious identities as victims and/or perpetrators of bias and violence. The course will examine bias and violence in Europe toward traditionally targeted groups such as LGBTQ, Muslim, Jewish, migrant and Roma people. Finally, the course will examine approaches to reducing bias motivated violence by police toward groups such as blacks, Muslims and Roma. Students will be evaluated based on short written responses to readings, in-class discussion, two papers and a final project. The final project will explore some aspect of bias motivated violence through persuasive writing, fiction, poetry, art, photography/film, advocacy or interviews. Course readings will include scholarly writing, reports from human rights NGOs, first person accounts and one novel. Class sessions will involve discussions led by me and at times by students, small group discussions between students and occasional guest presenters. The class will travel to Portland or Lewiston to meet with refugees from places in which bias motivated violence has been significant.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: none. Meets the following degree requirements: HS."
"This course is a comprehensive introduction to the biology of amphibians and reptiles.  We cover the systematics, physiology, behavior, and ecology of each group, with particular emphasis on the important contribution amphibian and reptilian studies have made to the fields of physiological, behavioral, and community ecology.  Readings are chosen from a text and from primary literature.  The course consists of two lecture/discussion sessions per week and one lab/field trip every week.  Weather dictates the number and focus of field trips, but students should expect to participate in both day and night field trips throughout the term.  Students are evaluated on class participation, exams, and a term-long field project. 

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisites:  Biology I and II or equivalent, and one Vertebrate Biology course.  Class limit: 12.   Offered every other year.   Lab fee:  $75.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES"
"Race as a concept was constructed in the western world in the early modern era as commentary on and explanation of human differences. This class will examine the origins of the idea of race and the ways it is central to the creation of the modern world. Drawing on histories of Europe and the Americas this class will look at the different ways racialized thinking was deployed in colonial contexts. Central themes of the course will be the history of race as an idea, the nature and impact of the Atlantic slave trade, how indigenous peoples reshaped European ideas of what it meant to be human, the construction of whiteness, and the history of slavery in the new world. The period covered by the class spans from the origins of race as an idea to the late nineteenth century. The course will be a hybrid of a lecture course and a readings seminar. Students will read major works in the field and develop an understanding of the historical background of contemporary forms of structural inequality justified and reinforced by racialized thinking. Students will do a series of short assignments, lead discussion of books, and undertake a major research paper. The research projects will allow students to explore topics beyond the chronological and spatial scope of the course.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $45.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS, HY"
"This course will explore the history of agriculture from the vantage point of Downeast Maine with a focus on apples.  The premise of the course is that by exploring this fascinating crop in detail from the local vantage point of Downeast Maine students will be able to grasp the many historical processes at work from the introduction of the fruit in the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries to the age of agricultural improvement in the eighteenth on to the rise and fall of commercial orcharding as a major component of Maine’s farm economy in the early twentieth century.  Using sources ranging from secondary sources, historical atlases, aerial surveys, and diaries, we will explore how the culture of apple agriculture in Maine develops over time as part of an interconnected Atlantic World where crops flow back and forth between Britain and the colonies/U.S. over hundreds of years.  Course activities will include fruit exploration and fieldtrips to track down and identify antique varieties, as well as visits to the local farms where a new generation of apple culture is taking shape.  The course will also engage students with the process of cider-making, both sweet and hard, as well as exercises in the preparation, storage, and processing of apples.  Students will be evaluated on their participation in discussion, how they collaborate with others in class projects, and a final individual or collaborative project.  This course is designed for students interested in history, farming and food systems, community-based research, and policy/planning issues.  It is also very appropriate for students who like apples and just want to know (a lot) more.

Level: Intermediate. Limit: 12. Lab Fee: $125.00. Meets the following degree requirements: HS HY"
"This course explores the history, production and meanings of motion pictures.  Using various films as case studies, we will look at the development of film forms, techniques and genres, beginning in the 1890s and progressing through the first fifty years of cinema history.  The films studied will include: narrative, avant-garde, documentary, and animation.  Students will learn concepts of film analysis and criticism. Students will have opportunities to practice critical skills in class discussions, and in research and writing assignments.  Students will be evaluated based on attendance, participation in class discussion, and written papers. Writing focus option.

Level: Introductory. Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: $35.  Meets the following degree requirements: HY AD WFO"
"D. W. Griffith, pioneer of early cinema, prophesied in 1924 that by 2024 cinema would have been instrumental in ""eliminating from the face of the civilized world all armed conflict"".  Where have things gone wrong? Cinema is a powerful medium that in many ways is still struggling to find its place among the other arts; there are many promising byways that have been overlooked or under-explored.  This course explores the histories, production and meanings of motion pictures. Using various films as case studies, we will look at the development of film forms, techniques and genres from 1946 to the present - the second half of cinema history.  Films studied will include examples of narrative, documentary, animation, and the avant-garde.  Students will learn concepts of film analysis and criticism, and will have opportunities to practice critical skills in class discussions and in research and writing assignments. Evaluation will be based on attendance, participation in class discussion, written papers, and research presentations. Film gives us the opportunity to, in the words of David Lynch, ""get lost in another world...to dream in the dark"". Who decides which dreams we will see? Through an understanding of where cinema has been we can more effectively shape its, and our, future. Writing Focus option.

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisites: none.  Class limit: 20.  Lab fee: $35.  Meets the following degree requirements: AD, HY"
"Women's health care and those who provide it have changed dramatically over the history of this country. Formal education for women, world politics, global and domestic economics, and many other factors have influenced how women have been treated in our health care system. This course will explore the history of women's health care and societal changes that shaped and influenced its delivery.  The role of midwives, the education requirements, expectations, credentialing, and licensing in the United States will be discussed. After completing this course, students will have a broader view of factors that influence how women's health care is delivered. They will know the options and requirements for midwifery education, and understand the varied roles that midwives perform in our health care system. Evaluation will be based on preparation for and participation in class discussion, research paper, and design of a project for meeting an unmet need in women's health.  

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class Limit: 15. Lab Fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"This introductory course charts the history of photography from early nineteenth-century nascent technologies (daguerreotypes and tintypes) through to the diverse range of photographic media currently practiced by contemporary artists and photographers (film and digital).  In this art history course, we will consider how the new visual discourse of photography was informed by both technological and social developments.  Photography cannot be defined as a unified medium; therefore, this course investigates both discontinuous as well as coalesced conventions within its own history; in other words, how and why photographs look different from each other.  In addition to noting external influences upon the photographic object, we will explore how photography helped to shape a variety of visual disciplines from painting to zines.  Accordingly, our class will discuss formal photographic syntax (how they are composed and the forms they appear represent) and allied aesthetic practices as well as the wider social and political issues that influenced the content of its visual culture.  We will study how artists use photographic practices in the context of social and activist functions to examine a diversity of subjects: gender and class, ethnic and national identity, among others; and, how categorical distinctions between mass culture and avant-garde art, commercial and fine art photography are not always stable.  Course readings include writings by historians, artists, and critics that reflect the unstable status of the photographic object within the intersections of science, technology and culture, aesthetic discourse and everyday documentation.  We will look at many photographs.  Students will be evaluated on their participation in class discussions, short essay assignments, and a final project or paper.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: none.  Class Limit: 15.  Lab Fee: $30.  Meets the following degree requirements: HY, AD"
"This course provides students with an overview of the American conservation movement from the 1600s through the present.  Through an examination of historical accounts and contemporary analysis, students develop an understanding of the issues, places, value conflicts, and people who have shaped conservation and environmental policy in the United States.  They also gain an appreciation for the relationship between the conservation movement and other social and political movements.  Students should come away with a sense of the historical and cultural context of American attitudes toward nature.  We also seek to apply these lessons to policy debates currently underway in Maine.  Working from original writings, students do in-depth research on a selected historical figure. Evaluation is based on problem sets, group activities, participation, and a final paper. 

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: none.  Class limit: 20.  Lab fee: none.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS, HY"
"Today, many use the words 'film' and 'video' interchangeably. In fact, these words refer to different mediums which evolved at different times, in different circumstances, and whose languages and practices originally developed around very different sets of concerns and purposes. In what ways is the distinction still useful in the digital age? This course will critically interrogate the ways humans use moving images to mediate our world, and the repercussions of these uses on individuals, culture, and the contents/subjects of the mediated messages. Many early video artists sought to distinguish the medium from film in that they wanted to create viewers who were active participants rather than passive recipients. In this class we will explore the political and self-expressive impulses in video art, and trace its history from 1965 - the year in which previously established artists Andy Warhol and Nam June Paik first publically exhibited video work - through to the current moment when film is almost extinct and video has become the world's dominant moving image medium. We will look at video art's ties to performance art and activism, and examine how many multi-media artists have situated their use of video in the context of their other practices. Artists whose work and writing about their work will be explored include: Vito Acconci, John Baldessari, Dara Birnbaum, Tony Conrad, Hermine Freed, Joan Jonas, Miranda July, Mariko Mori, Bruce Nauman, Pipilotti Rist, Bill Viola, and William Wegman. We will also examine the role and work of artists' collectives including Ant Farm, Broadside TV, Optic Nerve, and Video Free America. Through secondary sources we will look at the range of historical methodologies and critical theories that have been brought to bear on the works viewed. Evaluation will be based on participation in class discussions and two research papers. Students who come to class with experience working in video will have the opportunity to create their own original work in lieu of one of the two papers.

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit:  18.  Lab fee: $35.  Meets the following degree requirements: AD"
"This class will be an empirically-based research seminar on the history, politics, archaeology, and culture of Maine’s Wabanaki tribes that tackles a wide range of issues. The class will consist of several group projects on topics such as cataloging indigenous place names to the loss of cultural heritage sites due to coastal erosion. After completing several of these projects, students will develop their own research project on Wabanaki history and culture that they will conceptualize, plan and carry out. The class will also cover the themes of colonialism, cultural revitalization, tribal sovereignty, preservation of cultural resources, and much more. The course will be based on projects developed in consultation with tribal cultural preservation specialists and tribal historians from Maine’s Wabanaki communities. Final projects, so long as they have a historical component, can explore a topic of the student’s choosing in consultation with the faculty. This class is appropriate for students from a range of backgrounds. Previous coursework such as Indigenous America, Native American Law, Race and Racism in America, the Yucatan Program, or other relevant courses will be extremely helpful, and preference will be given to students who have some previous academic background in historical research, indigenous studies, and ethnography. Students who have taken classes with a strong component of textual analysis of historical sources are also encouraged to take the class. Students will learn to work with both primary and secondary sources (both written and visual). Students will be evaluated on their contribution to the group projects, participation in discussion, several small assignments, and their final project.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $60.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS, HY"
"This is the first course in a two-term sequence designed for students interested in pursuing medicine or biomedical research examines aspects of human anatomy and physiology, with particular emphasis on the digestive system, reproductive physiology, the  circulatory system, immune response, and elements of nutrition and  neurophysiology. This course will emphasize the relationships between anatomy and physiology and will focus on basic principles of biochemistry, the musculoskeletal system, digestion, nutrition, osmoregulation,  and circulation.  Readings include a standard pre-medical text and  some  primary literature.  Evaluation is based on a number of in-class quizzes a  term paper, participation in discussion and a final exam.  

Level: Intermediate/Advanced.  Prerequisite: Biology course work, some background in chemistry. Students are strongly encouraged to take both terms.  Class size: none.  Lab fee: $50.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES"
"Human Ecology is the interdisciplinary study of the relationships between humans and their natural and cultural environments.  The purpose of this course is to build a community of learners that explores the question of human ecology from the perspectives of the arts, humanities and sciences, both in and outside the classroom.  By the end of the course students should be familiar with how differently these three broad areas ask questions, pose solutions, and become inextricably intertwined when theoretical ideas are put into practice.  In the end, we want students to be better prepared to create their own human ecology degree through a more in-depth exploration of the courses offered at College of the Atlantic.  We will approach this central goal through a series of directed readings and activities.

Level:  Introductory.  Lab fee: $30.  Meets the following degree requirements: HE"
"This course will be an interdisciplinary exploration of the relationship between the place and people of Osakikamijima island in Hiroshima prefecture, Japan. With a rich maritime heritage, local farms, traditional culture, and tight knit community this Japanese island has many parallels with Mount Desert Island. In addition, Osakikamijima's aging population, depopulation, and isolation, also mimics the opportunities and challenges faced by much of Japan. 

The class begins in Hiroshima, where students will explore the tragic modern history of Hiroshima, as well as the 1500-year-old Miyajima shrine, a UNESCO World Heritage Site. Once on Osakikamijima, we place local knowledge and experiences at the center of the course with students immersing themselves in activities to spark their curiosity in Japanese island life and the natural environment. Students will engage with Japanese culture and language by interacting with island residents. To support their connection to community members, students will study beginner-level Japanese throughout their time on Osakikamijima. These ties will be reinforced with local travel and explorations as well as community members participating as workshop instructors and classroom guest speakers. To build familiarity with the island and the intersection of the natural and human worlds, students will conduct terrestrial and aquatic microplastics research. Further interaction between students and the community will be promoted with weeklong “micro-internships” at a variety of food systems and other enterprises working in harmony with the natural environment. At the conclusion of the program, students will give short presentations to the community showing what has made the strongest impression on them during their time here, and how it could be used to draw in the people to help Osakikamijima survive.

Students will be evaluated based on their performance, participation and the quality of the assignments they produce over the course of the term including: class participation; a video montage; verbal presentations; reflection papers; and a final project presentation to the community.

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 10. Lab fee: $1200. Meets the following prerequisites: None."
"Humans don’t have a steady growth rate. In the first two years of life for human children the rate is fast, and then it slows for the next seven to ten years and then things speed up again. Interestingly, a child’s brain is already at 90% of its full size by age five. So many factors go into the development of children from their birth to the time that they enter adulthood. What do children inherit from their parents, biologically, culturally, socially, and how do those influences help us understand individual child development? In this course, students will explore and examine the contributions of prominent theorists and empirical research to foster a deeper understanding of the complexities of child development from birth through adolescence. This foundational learning will support students as they investigate additional influences on development. Students will be asked to reflect on their own development and the factors that helped to shape their own growth. Additionally, students will read and discuss current research in psychology, neuroscience, education, and sociology as integral parts of student learning. Understanding the arc of development is essential for individuals who work in education and related fields. Knowing what to expect in typical development is imperative to providing appropriate experiences and curriculum, and facilitates positive coaching and partnering with parents and caregivers. While this class is primarily geared towards individuals who may pursue education or education-adjacent fields, it is ultimately a class intended to explore what it means to develop and grow as a human from early childhood up to adolescence. Students should expect the following experiences and assessments: rich class discussions based on readings and personal reflections, field observations, hands-on activities, assigned work, and class presentations.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 15. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"This course will look at the complex issues surrounding the development, distribution, use and control of fresh water around the world.  Focusing primarily on developing countries, we will examine three aspects of water use and control.  First we will look at the scope and impact of water development projects; second we will examine the conflicts and solutions related to transboundary river basins; and third we will consider the implication of privatization of water resources.  By way of background, we will review the variety of demands placed on fresh water and the political institutions related to water development.  Students will gain a solid background in international environmental law as it relates to multilateral and bilateral treaties, customary law, multilateral institutions, and the guidance of international ""soft law"".   They will also understand the allocation and equity issues surrounding the privatization of water and the political dimensions of this shift.  Ultimately, these issues will give a concrete understanding of some aspects of the concept of sustainable development.  Evaluation will be based on class participation, short analytical papers, and a substantial term-long assignment.

Level: Advanced. Prerequisites: Solid background in international politics, economics, human rights, or development policy through coursework or personal experience. Class limit: 20.  Lab fee: $15.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"On the one hand, modern economies are shaped by uneven capitalist development and premised on exploiting colonized, raced, gendered, sexualized Others. On the other hand, the racial and sexual violences at the heart of economic relations are often rationalized, naturalized, and turned invisible. In this course, we will explore the visible tip of the iceberg of these systemic inequities in the context of the contemporary US labor markets. We will focus on quantitative, empirical evidence of how race, gender, and sexuality influence individuals’ earnings, career prospects, life opportunities, and health and well-being; and how intersectional positionalities amplify or mitigate these disparities. We will pay particular attention to the Black–White gaps and cisgender–transgender gaps in economic opportunities and outcomes. We will also study theoretical approaches in labor economics, ranging from neoclassical economic models of discrimination to feminist economics models of marriage and intra-household bargaining, and stratification models of racial wealth inequality.

This course is intended for students who want to develop a quantitative understanding of the economic disparities that racial, gender, and sexual minorities face in the US. You will evaluate how economic policies can be used to generate and reproduce inequalities between social groups, and how they can also be used to promote a more just and equitable economy. You will leverage the tools developed in this class to prepare yourself for independent intellectual engagement in an area of personal interest, including senior projects, independent studies, internship, or postgraduate work. This is an intermediate-level seminar. Students will be evaluated through leading group discussion of assigned reading materials and developing a summative research proposal on a relevant topic of their choice.

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: Students should have working knowledge of (1) introductory microeconomics or macroeconomics, and (2) introductory statistics (which can be acquired by taking college-level courses or through prior knowledge or self-learning). Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: HS, QR."
"Illustrating magazines or books, envisioning scientific ideas, inventing characters and imaginary worlds, representing natural subjects; this intermediate studio arts course in visual communication engages you in examining and creating images that depict ideas, stories and information. Through lectures and assignments students will investigate the history of illustration, view the work of contemporary illustrators, and be instructed in traditional and digital illustration techniques. Students will be encouraged to explore a variety of mediums and develop a unique and personal approach to image making. Class members will learn and practice the process of researching and developing ideas from rough sketches to finished artwork that is publication-ready. Emphasis is on the elements that form strong visual ideas. Exercises and workshops will introduce techniques in various mediums including gouache, watercolor, colored pencil, scratchboard, and ink. Instruction will include, and encourage, a wide variety of experimental hand-generated techniques on a range of surfaces. Students will also be instructed in the basics of digital applications for image generation, assembly and alteration. A final project will afford students an opportunity to define their own content focus. Evaluation will be based on attendance, participation in discussions and critiques, timely completion of assignments, quality of work produced, and their ability to clearly communicate ideas through illustration.  Offered in alternate years.

Level: Introduction/Intermediate.  Prerequisites: Introduction to Drawing, Painting 1, Printmaking, or Graphic Design, and signature of instructor.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: $100.  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS"
"This course provides students with an immersion experience in the language and culture of the Yucatán Peninsula. The course aims to increase student’s abilities to navigate the linguistic and cultural terrain of another society in sensitive, ethical, and effective ways. Class sessions, visiting lecturers, field trips, and readings will provide background on the history and anthropology of Yucatecan culture. Immersion experiences and living with a family will provide one important source of experiential learning. A second source takes the form of an independent project developed by each student based on the student’s interests. This practicum experience involves weekly activities during the term and an intensive independent project during the last three weeks. During these final three weeks, students live in a community of the students choosing, provided the location is relevant to their study and project. While each student is completely free to create their own unique project, past projects have included: creating a children's book, filming a documentary about the families work as ‘Mayan Dancers’, organizing classes for the children in the community, and participating in a crocodile research project. Evaluation is based on participation in the project as well as the final project presentation. 

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisite: Permission of Instructor. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: $1,700. Meets the following degree requirements: HS."
"This course is offered through collaboration with CAVILAM as part of the COA program in Vichy, France.  Students will take language classes and workshops taught by immersion methods and advanced audio-visual techniques.  Students  live with host families in homestays and take part in a variety of cultural activities.  They are carefully tested and placed at levels appropriate to their ability and are expected to advance in all four language skills - reading, writing, speaking and listening - as gauged by the European Erasmus scale of competency.

Level: Beginning to advanced (depending on prior language level). Prerequisites: permission of instructor. Class limit: 9.  Program fee: $1500. Meets the following degree requirement: none."
"This course is offered through collaboration with CAVILAM as part of the COA program in Vichy, France.  Students  take 20 hours a week of  language classes and workshops taught by immersion methods and advanced audio-visual techniques.  Students  live with host families in homestays and take part in a variety of cultural activities.  They are carefully tested and placed at levels appropriate to their ability and are expected to advance in all four language skills - reading, writing, speaking and listening - as gauged by the  European Erasmus scale of competency.  

Level: Beginning to advanced (depending on prior language level). Pre-requisite: at least one previous French course and permission of instructor; this course is intended to complement a term of COA instruction in Vichy, France. Class limit: 12.  Program fee: $1500. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"This ""hands on"" theory/performance course for singers, instrumentalists, guitarists, pianists, drummers, etc., deals with improvisation, a spontaneous exchange or interplay of musical ideas and moods. It offers the musician the opportunity to utilize his/her technical ability to its fullest extent while enjoying the creative freedom of spontaneous composition. The class addresses technical and aesthetic aspects of improvisation in all styles of music (jazz, rock, blues, classical, folk, etc.), including the elements of melodic development, melodic cliches, rhythmic and melodic embellishment, harmonic substitutions, and development of the ear. It is multilevel in format, allowing for students of all technical proficiency to participate. In short, this course enables students to use the ""tools of improvisation"" to be able to make a ""personal musical statement"" while playing, singing, ""jamming,"" etc. 

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: $20. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"This course will provide an introduction to the history of indigenous peoples in the Americas. Using a seminar style the class will combine some overview lectures, student-led discussion of books, and project-based learning to provide an initial introduction to the diverse histories of native peoples from Canada to the Andes. The course will focus on both pre-contact societies as well as the processes of interaction between Europeans and indigenous peoples in the Americas. Using a selection of case studies the course will highlight building an understanding of indigenous worldviews as well as socio-political organization and the ways both were transformed by colonialism. A range of books will introduce students to the ethnohistorical literature on native communities from Mesoamerica, North America, and the Andes. A simultaneous component of the course will be student’s research projects on a topic of their choosing that explores a dimension of native people’s histories. Students will be evaluated on attendance, course participation, short analytical essays, and their final project.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate.  Prerequisites: none, however, students without any background in history should expect to invest extra time with the readings and writing assignments.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: none.  Meets the following degree requirements:  HS, HY"
"This course introduces students to some of the critical environmental issues Indigenous peoples face in Maine and throughout North America due to climate change and environmental injustice. Students will explore theories of structural power and colonization, as well as case studies examining the legal recognition of Indigenous peoples, and their lands, by contemporary governments. These historical forces, and their effects on current environmental, political, and legal logics will be critically analyzed while also exploring various legal and political strategies applied by Indigenous nations as they adapt to climate change and participate in the global policy response to our changing climate. Students will have the opportunity to deepen their understanding of Traditional Ecological Knowledge (TEK) and Indigenous Science in relation to climate effects on natural resource conditions, as well as climate justice resistance and resilience movements. Through rethinking colonialism, the course will deconstruct contemporary issues of climate change while analyzing some of the ideological and structural logics that perpetuate environmental devastation, its disproportionate impacts on Indigenous peoples globally, and the local and Indigenous movements who are dynamically changing the narrative around resistance, justice, and knowledge. Students will be evaluated based on class participation, a series of synthesis papers, a student designed mini-ethnographic project, and a final research proposal and paper.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: none. Class limit: 15. Lab fee: none."
"""space in active dialogue with the things and people it contains...""  -RoseLee Golberg, from Space as Praxis
Installation art is one of the most original, vigorous, and fertile forms of contemporary art. 

It often involves working in specific non-art sites where the activation of the place, or context, of artistic intervention is concerned not only with art and its boundaries, but also with the fusion of art and life. Installation art extends the area of practice from the studio to public space. Architects, urban planners, and environmental designers consider similar formal and social aspects of space in the creation of city plans, buildings, and public spaces. Through hands-on projects and a survey of historic and contemporary art and design work, this intermediate level 3D studio course offers an opportunity to explore formal aspects and social contexts of space and time as a medium for making art.

Students will create interior and exterior installations that may incorporate sculptural elements, everyday objects, light, sound, or other devices. Course work will investigate the objective and subjective qualities of space, material, and form, and the meanings created through their juxtaposition. In addition to studio work, we will survey a variety of historic and contemporary contextual art works including: spaces laid out by architects and designers, installation itself as an art form, public art projects, sacred spaces, the work of visionary artists, historic sites, and monuments.  Students will be evaluated on their participation in class activities and critiques, their timely completion of projects, and attendance.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced.  Prerequisites: 3D studio classes in art, architecture, environmental design, performance art or signature of instructor.  Class limit: 10.  Lab fee: $90.  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS"
"This course is designed to prepare prospective teachers with methods necessary to implement a comprehensive literacy program for grades K-4 to include all aspects of literacy acquisition. Major areas of focus will include oral, visual and technological communication, shared and interactive strategies, phonics, word study and spelling, independent and guided reading, writing workshop and writing in all content areas. The course content focuses on an integrated approach to the acquisition of literacy skills, current best practice, and lesson design, questioning techniques, formative and summative assessment. Learning objectives address the standards for Maine Initial Teacher Certification, Common Core State Standards, and the Maine Learning Results. There is a fieldwork component of 50 hours for this ten-week course. For example, 2 classroom observations for 3 hours each for a total of 6 hours per week, excluding the week of school vacation and week 10. There will be a weekly one-hour lab, shared with Integrated Methods I: Gr 5-8. Evaluation will be based on the quality of a course portfolio to include class participation, curriculum and assessment design, performance assessments, cooperating teacher feedback, and reflections on the fieldwork and required readings.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisite: Child Development, Integrated Methods I: Gr 5-8, and, if possible, Children's Literature. Class limit: 12.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS ED"
"This course is designed to prepare prospective teachers with methods necessary to implement a comprehensive literacy program for grades PreK-3 to include all aspects of literacy acquisition. Major areas of focus will include oral, visual, and technological communication, shared and interactive strategies, phonics, word study and spelling, independent and guided reading, writing workshop, and writing in all content areas. The course content focuses on an integrated approach to the acquisition of literacy skills, current best practice, and lesson design, questioning techniques, formative and summative assessment. Learning objectives address the standards for Maine’s teaching standards and Maine's Learning Results. There is a fieldwork component of 50 hours for this ten-week course. There will be a weekly one-hour lab, shared with Integrated Methods I: Gr 5-8. Evaluation will be based on the quality of a course portfolio to include class participation, curriculum and assessment design, performance assessments, cooperating teacher feedback, and reflections on the fieldwork and required readings. 

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Pre or corequisites: Child Development, Supporting Students with Disabilities, Integrated Methods I: Gr 3-6, and, if possible, Children’s Literature. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: HS, ED."
"This course is designed to prepare prospective teachers with methods necessary to implement a comprehensive literacy program for grades 5-8 to include: motivation and the middle school reader; helping middle-school students develop their writing voice through knowledge of language, vocabulary acquisition and use, and working with a variety of text; teaching critical, creative, and collaborative technology use; using multiple tools to differentiate instruction; creating and using rubrics for assessing writing. The course content focuses on an integrated approach to the acquisition of literacy skills, current best practice, lesson design, questioning techniques, and formative and summative assessment. Learning objectives address Maine’s teaching standards, the Common Core State Standards for students, and the Maine Learning Results. There is a field studies component of 50 hours for this ten-week course. (For example, three classroom observations for two hours each for a total of six hours per week, excluding school vacation week and week 10.) There will be a weekly one-hour lab, shared with Integrated Methods IA: Gr K-4.  Evaluation will be based on the quality of a course portfolio to include curriculum and assessment design, performance assessments, cooperating teacher feedback on classroom performance, and reflections on the fieldwork and required readings.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Pre- or co-requisite: Permission of instructor, Child Development, Integrated Methods IA: Gr K-4 Reading and Writing, and, if possible, Children's Literature. Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $20.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS ED"
"This course is designed to prepare prospective teachers with methods necessary to implement a comprehensive literacy program for grades 3-6 to include: motivation and the upper elementary reader; helping middle grade students develop their writing voice through knowledge of language, vocabulary acquisition and use, and working with a variety of text; teaching critical, creative, and collaborative technology use; using multiple tools to differentiate instruction; creating and using rubrics/alternatives for assessing writing. The course content focuses on an integrated approach to the acquisition of literacy skills, current effective practices, lesson design, questioning techniques, and formative and summative assessment. Learning objectives address Maine’s teaching standards and Maine's Learning Results. There is a field studies component of 50 hours and there will be a weekly one-hour lab, shared with Integrated Methods IA: Gr PreK-3. Evaluation will be based on the quality of a course portfolio to include curriculum and assessment design, performance assessments, cooperating teacher feedback on classroom performance, and reflections on the fieldwork and required readings. 

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Pre or corequisites: Child Development, Supporting Students with Disabilities, Integrated Methods IA: Gr PreK-3 Reading and Writing, and, if possible, Children’s Literature. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: $20. Meets the following degree requirements: HS, ED."
"How can an integrated curriculum for elementary school students help to deepen the relationships children and young adolescents construct with the natural and social worlds in a way that promotes their capacity to know themselves and the communities in which they act?  For those preparing to be elementary school educators (grades K-8), this three-credit course provides an intensive guided apprenticeship that prepares the student-teacher with the necessary knowledge, skills, and experience to design an integrated math, science, and social studies curriculum, create and maintain a constructive learning environment, teach diverse learners using appropriate teaching methods and learning technologies, and assess student learning.  Learning objectives include all eleven of Maine’s teaching standards as well as a working knowledge of the Parameters for Essential Instruction (PEI) for Math, Science, and Social Studies.  Students will participate in a ten-week field work practicum observing and participating in elementary classrooms as well as planning and teaching weekly in a lab environment.  Readings, discussions, and experiential learning in class will complement the field work component.  Evaluation will be based on reflection on fieldwork, participation in discussions of readings and field work, curriculum and assessment design and implementation, and professional performance in lab school and at the practicum site.   

Level:  Advanced.  Prerequisites: Supporting Students with Disabilities in the Regular Classroom, Integrated Elementary Methods I: Reading and Writing, and permission of instructor.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $25.  Meets the following degree requirements: ED HS"
"In this course, students will examine existing curriculum and lesson plans for hands-on energy education (created by the non-profit Envirolution). This project-based science, technology, engineering, art and mathematics (STEAM) curriculum engages K-12 students to learn how their home, school and community use energy. It culminates with students conducting an energy assessment of their school, identifying ways to reduce energy consumption, costs and carbon emissions. Envirolution is a non-profit organization based in Reno, Nevada, that works with 200+ teachers in Nevada, California and Arizona. Through this course we will be helping to introduce their Project ReCharge lessons and activities to teachers and students in Maine.

Working in pairs or small groups, students will trial the lessons with their COA classmates, taking feedback and refining their approach. They will deconstruct the lesson plans and identify ways that climate change and environmental justice can be further incorporated into the activities. We will discuss systemic injustices rooted in fossil fuel consumption, and the impacts of energy use on the environment and marginalized communities. At the end of the term, each group will partner with a local K-12 school and lead the students through one or more lessons centered on energy efficiency. This course will feature community partnerships and collaborative approaches to addressing fossil fuel consumption and climate change. Students will use a lesson plan template provided by Envirolution, which will allow lessons developed to be added into the Project ReCharge curriculum package, with the opportunity for them to be made available to other teachers using the curriculum.

This course could contribute to practica requirements for teaching certification candidates.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: $50.  Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"Intercultural communication deals with the communicative interactions of people and groups across cultures. In this interdisciplinary course, you will examine the communication factors within intercultural encounters and consider topics, including but not limited to: the significance and history of intercultural communication studies; language, identity, and culture; intercultural competencies; power and ideology in intercultural communication; intercultural conflicts and relationships; intercultural communication in educational and other contexts. The primary goals of this course are to: (1) raise your awareness of intercultural communicative differences; (2) provide you with the concepts, knowledge, and skills to analyze, interpret, and respond to different intercultural communicative processes on the interpersonal, group, and/or organizational levels. To accomplish these goals, the course will introduce you to texts and other audiovisual materials featuring narratives and scenarios of intercultural communication; engage you in immersive and interactive learning activities that will expose you to others’ perspectives and experiences of intercultural communication; equip you with the tools to develop intercultural competence. Class sessions will include some lectures but mostly consist of guided discussions, activities, and presentations. Evaluations will be based on individual and group projects that involve intercultural interactions, interviews, film screenings and discussions, and intercultural competence workshops . 

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 15. Lab fee: $20."
"This course helps intermediate level students increase proficiencies in all four skill areas - listening, speaking, reading and writing - using a workshop format drawing on the internet resources and pedagogical methods of the French language institute at CAVILAM in Vichy, France.  Classes will meet four times a week for 1.5 hour sessions and will include discussions, readings, small and large group activities, and a variety of other exercises that draw on authentic language materials.  This is for students with sufficient background in French to engage in basic conversations and learn in a workshop format - students who, using the Common European Framework, are at an A2 to B1 level.  Students will be evaluated through written and oral tests, class participation, short papers and oral presentations.  

Level:  Intermediate.  Prerequisite: Placement exam required to confirm level.  Class limit: 15.  Course fee:  $25."
"This is a ceramics course for students with intermediate levels of skill. This course will focus on hand-building, clay slab construction and advanced throwing techniques. A basic level of skill on the potters wheel is required. Glazing and decorating processes, alternative firing techniques and ceramic technology will be introduced, as well as artistic concepts and design principles relevant to artistic expression in the ceramic medium. Historical and contemporary ceramic works and artists will be studied. Students will be evaluated on class attendance, participation, completion of assignments and sketch book entries. 

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisites: Ceramics I, a similar course in another college or high school, or permission of instructor.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $95. Meets the following degree requirements: ADS"
"This is a studio course which builds on foundational drawing skills. Students will work with dry and wet media; there will be an emphasis on composition; and students will be asked to synthesize different kinds of spaces in single pieces. The assignments in the beginning of the term are designed to reiterate foundational drawing skills such as sighting and measuring and articulating a broad range of values in charcoal. Students will then work with ink and consider different ways of representing three-dimensional forms and spaces on paper and work at a large scale. The last part of the term will focus on color: students will work with pastels. We will work with a model and draw the figure in charcoal and in color. The translation of light and shadow and the integration of the figure into the environment will be emphasized. Evaluation will be based on the completion of exercises and assignments in a way that demonstrates an understanding of the concepts and ideas introduced in the class, engagement with course materials, participation in discussions and critiques, and the ability to respond to feedback in one’s work.

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: Previous drawing experience.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $115.  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS."
"In this intermediate level course, students will explore at least three distinct working methods for making a small body of work. Through demonstrations and subsequent linked assignments, students will explore the figure and portrait, still life tabletop and one other topic to be decided by the group. After completing the three modules, students will have time to complete a final project in the style and method of their choosing. Critiques, readings, and research will help build a visual and intellectual vocabulary to explain and explore these personal projects. The primary goal of this course is for each student to make a meaningful body of work in their own style that could be ‘ready to hang’ in a gallery. We will be spending considerable time in class editing and printing. Students should expect to spend considerable time outside of class making pictures. Self-motivation, the ability to collaborate on an idea or image, and being on time will all be expected. Some prior experience with Adobe Lightroom Classic or Photoshop is highly recommended. Students will be evaluated on their progress towards their goals, and participation in discussions and critiques; pass/fail grade encouraged. In order to register for this course, students  must have previously taken Introduction to Photography. If you have not taken Introduction  to Photography, but have equivalent experience, please contact the instructor directly for permission to add the course. 

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: Intro to Photography or equivalent or permission of instructor. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: $100. Meets the following degree requirements: ADS"
"This course is for students who are competent in the use of basic Spanish structures, of the simple and compound of the indicative tenses, and some forms of the imperative tense. Objective: The students will be able to express themselves orally and through writing using a variety of vocabulary, the indicative and imperative moods, and some applications of the subjunctive mood. This includes a review of the present, preterite, future imperfect, preterite imperfect tenses, pronouns of object direct and indirect, imperative mood, expanded use of the ""to be"" and ""is"" verbs, the prepositions and simple conditional, the study and practice of the compound tenses of the indicative mood, present perfect, plus perfect, and future perfect. They will also study the subjunctive mood and verbs that express emotion. Evaluation Criteria:  two compositions, two auditory tests, two writing tests covering grammar, two oral tests, assignments/ homework, class participation.

Level:  Intermediate.  Offered every fall.  Class limit: 10.  Lab fee: $20. Meets the following degree requirements: HS."
"This course is for students who use the simple and compound structures of the indicative mood. Objective: The students will express themselves orally and through writing using the appropriate vocabulary and complex sentence structure in the indicative, subjunctive, and imperative moods, adverb clauses and more sophisticated idioms. Evaluation Criteria:  two compositions, two auditory tests, two writing tests covering grammar, two oral tests, assignments/homework, class participation.

Level: Intermediate.  Class limit: 10. Lab fee: $20. Meets the following degree requirements: HS."
"""Save the whales""; ""save the tiger""; ""save the rainforest"" - - increasingly wildlife and their habitats are the subject of international debate with many seeing wildlife as part of the common heritage of humankind.  Wildlife does not recognize the political boundaries of national states and as a result purely national efforts to protect wildlife often fail when wildlife migrates beyond the jurisdiction of protection. This course focuses on two principle aspects of international wildlife conservation:  1) the framework of treaties and other international mechanisms set up to protect species; and 2) the system of protected areas established around the world to protect habitat. We begin with an examination of several seminal wildlife treaties such as the International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling, CITES, migratory bird treaties, and protocols to the Antarctica Treaty.  Using case studies on some of the more notable wildlife campaigns, such as those involving whales and elephants, we seek to understand the tensions between national sovereignty and international conservation efforts.  The Convention on Biological Diversity and its broad prescriptions for wildlife protection provide a central focus for our examination of future efforts.  Following on one of the key provisions in the Convention on Biological Diversity, the second half of the course focuses on international and national efforts to create parks and other protected areas.  In particular we evaluate efforts to create protected areas that serve the interests of wildlife and resident peoples.  Students gain familiarity with UNESCO's Biosphere Reserve model and  the IUCN's protected area classifications.  We also examine in some depth the role that NGO's play in international conservation efforts.  The relationship between conservation and sustainable development is a fundamental question throughout the course.
 
Level: Intermediate. Recommended courses:  Use and Abuse of Public Lands, Global Politics and Sustainability, Global Environmental Politics. Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"This course will examine the last 20,000 years of Maine’s climate and human history. 20,000 years ago Maine was completely covered by the Laurentide Ice Sheet (LIS) rendering the landscape uninhabitable to plants and animals alike. Shortly following the recession of the LIS, humans entered the scene and for thousands of years modified the landscape to better suit their needs. With the arrival of European colonizers came great cultural and biological upheaval: the Great Dying of America’s indigenous populations, introductions of invasive species, and novel agricultural practices. Through the lens of paleoecology, we will explore how Maine’s biological, geological, and cultural landscapes have responded to perturbations through time.

This course explores these changes within a place-based experience on a farm on Marsh Stream in Monroe, Maine. Topics for this course include past environmental change and ecological responses in species, populations, and ecosystem processes; common methods and proxies in paleoecological analyses; ecological principles applied to past organisms; paleohuman influences on the landscape; impacts of European colonization and the pristine myth; and the role of paleoecology in modern conservation efforts.

The class will include weekly lectures, discussion sections, and labs. Labs will include collecting a sediment core, examining different proxies from that core (ie. charcoal, macrofossils, sediment type), identifying evidence of glaciation, examining forest succession, and mapping the historic agricultural landscape. Students will generate and analyze data for a collaborative original research paper and results will be written up in the form of a manuscript for publication.

Students will be evaluated based on discussion leadership for two classes, a lab/field notebook and research updates (including group presentations), a collaborative, publishable-quality manuscript of all research findings, and a final outreach project to share the findings of the semester long study with the broader COA community.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate.  Prerequisites: Permission of instructor; co-enrollment in ES1072 Chemistry and Biology of Food and Drink, and MD1024 Life With Principle.  Class limit: 8.  Lab fee: TBD."
"The intertidal occupies the space on the ocean shore between the highest and lowest extents of the tides, and the organisms inhabiting the intertidal must adapt to an ever-fluctuating environment. It is unique among ecosystems in that it condenses and concentrates many ecological processes along a strong physiological gradient, and so serves as an ideal environment to observe and investigate fundamental ecological principles.

In this course, you will be introduced to the many diverse intertidal ecosystems of coastal Maine, from rocky shorelines to tidal mudflats to salt marshes. Through discussions in class and observations in the field, we will endeavor to answer the questions:

What organisms are found in the intertidal, and how are they adapted to life there?
How is the distribution of intertidal organisms dictated by living in a transitional environment?
How do intertidal organisms interact with each other, and how does this shape the community?

We meet twice per week for class time with one afternoon lab period. During lab time we will be going on field trips as much as possible to explore the local intertidal habitats. This course is intended as an accessible introduction to marine community ecology and field work. Assessment is based on weekly question sets, lab assignments, and a short research proposal.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 16. Lab fee: $40. Meets the following degree requirements: ES."
"From a historical perspective domestic violence has been noted as primarily a ""women’s issue"". We now recognize the misuse of power and control in relationships as a complex and prevalent social issue that profoundly impacts our society as a whole. To address the complexity of domestic violence we must strive toward changing the belief systems that allow this problem to exist. Together we will explore these belief systems by examining the aspects of culture that shape and support domestic violence on individual, community, institutional, and global levels. We will review the history of the domestic violence movement, including its roots in the women’s movement and how that movement grew into a network of victim-centered services and community-based advocacy responses. As a student you will learn how best to respond to victims of intimate partner violence, and how to apply the core principles of individual, community, institutional, and social change advocacy. You will be challenged to consider and reflect upon your own beliefs and cultural lenses throughout the course. The class format includes lectures, role-plays, media presentations, interviews with guest speakers, group work, and discussions. Opportunities will be provided for students to reflect upon experiences, to practice skills, and apply new learning through community and cultural change projects. Students will be evaluated on their critical thinking, analysis, and synthesis of the course goals and objectives as demonstrated by participation in class activities (responsiveness to required and suggested readings and materials, guest and peer generated discussion), personal culture analysis (personal reflection, self-evaluation).  

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $10. Meets the following degree requirements: HS."
"In this intermediate level painting course the focus will be on ritualized processes of image making and creative thinking using water based media. Painting is a collaboration between the maker, the “paint,” and the subject, characterized by fluidity and interchange. It has the potential to bring us closer to ourselves, our materials and the world around us. We will explore listening and responding sensitively through various awareness building practices. Questions of content, composition, and aesthetic choices that best serve our expressive needs will be part of our group conversations. Building a daily practice will be supported with required visual and written journaling. Our work will take place both in the studio and outside, using various methods of research and mark/record making. Sources will include the study of Hilma af Klint and her contemporaries, Haitian Vodou painting, and Tantric Painting from Rajasthan among others. Students will be evaluated based on in-class assignments, out of class assignments, participation in class discussions, research, and an individual cohesive final project.

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: Students taking this class should have had prior introductory coursework in painting or other college level coursework in related arts (performance, illustration, printmaking) that would prepare them for an intermediate studio arts class.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $90.  Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"Introduction to Academic Writing introduces students not only to writing as process — prewriting, writing, and rewriting — but also to resources that aid students in writing successfully in an academic setting. Students will meet weekly as a class and individually with the instructor and/or peer tutor. They will also meet with library staff who will introduce students to the range of online resources available and how best to access them. Both the writing and speaking assignments are based on assignments in other courses, particularly the Human Ecology Core Course. Since writing is a maturation process, evaluations are based on the student’s growth as a writer, participation in class discussions and peer review sessions, and ability to meet deadlines. This course may be taken either for credit or non-credit, and prepares students to successfully take Writing Seminar I and II, Introduction to Journalism, Communicating Science, and any of the College Seminars, all of which meet the Writing Course degree requirement.

Level: Introductory.   Prerequisites: Permission of instructor. Class limit: 10  Lab fee: none."
"This course focuses on the segment of the human life span from puberty to early adulthood.  In this class we will examine the physical, cognitive, social, and moral aspects of adolescent growth and development.  Issues to be considered include adolescent relationships (peers, family, romantic), adolescent issues (identity formation, at risk behavior, schooling, and stereotypes), and critical reflection on one's own adolescent experience. The main objectives of this course are to: 1) provide students with a working knowledge of the theories of psychology which pertain to early adolescent development; 2) help students develop the ability to critically analyze information and common assumptions about the development of adolescents; 3) consider contemporary issues and concerns of the field; and 4) to afford students the opportunity to explore their own adolescent development.  Course work entails lecture, discussion, extensive case analysis, and a field component.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisite: None. Class limit: 15. Meets the following degree requirements: HS ED"
"Not all people are able to talk about their feelings, some people need to express them. Introduction to Art Therapy is designed to introduce undergraduates to the philosophical, pragmatic, and historical foundations of the human service field of art therapy. Art processes have been used successfully in almost all psychotherapeutic contexts, ranging from work with those who are severely ill to the facilitation of mindfulness. Art therapy continues to grow in communities to bring personal healing to mental, emotional, and physical health concerns. Art therapy is used in educational settings, hospitals, hospice, corporations, and community art projects, especially after traumatic events. The intellectual framework and methodologies of art and psychotherapy will be outlined and discussed within the course lessons. Class discussions will stimulate integrated thinking and provide a platform to reflect on personal growth. Specific art directives will give you an opportunity to be creative and strengthen your understanding of art therapy. A weekly visual journal will be required (prompts will be given). Lecture, discussion, audio-visual presentation, and experiential exercises creating expressive art comprise the structure of the class. Evaluations are based on two papers, class presentations, participation and weekly visual journal, and a final self reflection. 

Level: Introductory. Pre-requisites: None. Class limit: 15. Lab Fee: $35. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"This course is the fundamental course for students pursuing studies in Arts and Design, offering insights into a range of issues addressed in the arts and design curriculum. This course includes studio, field, historical, and theoretical components.  Students learn how basic design principals are applied in garden design, historic architectural styles, and planning. They also examine the history and application of perspective drawing and color theory. Students are expected to observe, document, analyze, and make recommendations for improvement of the designed world. Studio work involves both individual and team efforts which are presented for class critique. Learning to give constructive critique is an essential skill and an integral part of many arts and design courses. The last two weeks are dedicated to final projects where students delve deeper into any aspect of the course. Students are expected to complete each project, read assigned books and excerpts, and participate in class discussions and critiques. All work is submitted at the end of term and evaluations are based on attendance, participation, and submitted work. 

Level:  Introductory.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 25.  Lab fee $30.  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS"
"In this course, student will learn the fundamentals of catalysis: how chemical reactions (in the body, in industrial settings, or geological systems) can be accelerated and steered by other actors (enzymes in a biological context, precious metals in an industrial setting, or minerals in a geological context). Catalysts are everywhere around us. Enzymes in your body are catalysts that drive metabolic processes, the catalytic converter in your car or woodstove transforms harmful combustion side products into more benign products. Catalysts in industrial contexts enable the production of elaborate pharmaceuticals, drugs or materials. Minerals in hydrothermal vents can facilitate reactions useful for the emergence of life (CO2 can be transformed into larger carbon-containing biomolecules). In the classroom and the laboratory setting, students will explore how catalysts decrease the energy demand for various chemical transformations, and in some cases open up new pathways for otherwise inaccessible processes. This course is relevant for students interested in molecular biology, green/sustainable chemistry, and conversion of biomass to value-added chemicals. This course will be laboratory intensive, accessible for introductory students, yet still relevant for advanced students. Importantly this course can serve as an additional credit of organic chemistry for graduate or professional school for those who need it. In the lab, students will set up chemical reactions and analyze the products by gas chromatography mass spectrometry, by nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy and by UV/visible spectroscopy.

Students will be assessed based on their participation in laboratory experiments, through laboratory reports, and participation in discussions of assigned readings.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES, QR."
"Hand-Built-Pots explores potentialities of form and function in contemporary ceramics. Through this intro-level handbuilding course, students will learn ceramic methods such as coil-building, slab construction, and press molding as they consider/create clay pots. Students in this course will take up vessel-making to explore storytelling, personal metaphor, and conceptual practice. Histories of the vessel will provide context for ceramic explorations, as artists such as Magdalene Odondo, Betty Woodman, and Toshiko Takaezu guide our conversations. Assignments include the production of a series of vessel-inspired artworks. Students will be evaluated based on their participation in class discussions and critiques, as well as their inventiveness and demonstrated effort in ceramic assignments.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $95.  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS"
"This course presents an elementary introduction to chaos and fractals.  The main focus will be on using discrete dynamical systems to illustrate many of the key phenomena of chaotic dynamics: stable and unstable fixed and periodic points, deterministic chaos, bifurcations, and universality.  A central result of this study will be the realization that very simple non-linear equations can exhibit extremely complex behavior.  In particular, a simple deterministic system (i.e., physical system governed by simple, exact mathematical rules) can behave in a way that is unpredictable and random, (i.e., chaotic).  This result suggests that there are potentially far-reaching limits on the ability of science to predict certain phenomena.  Students in this class will also learn about fractals---self-similar geometric objects---including the Mandelbrot set and Julia sets.  We will also read about and discuss the development of the field of chaos.  In so doing, we will examine the nature of scientific communities, with a particular eye toward how changes in scientific outlooks occur.  Throughout the course, students will be encouraged to explore the relations between chaos, fractals, and other areas of study such as literature, art, and cultural studies.  Students who successfully complete this class should gain a quantitative and qualitative understanding of the basic ideas of chaos and fractals, a greater understanding of the cultural practice of science, and improved mathematical skills.  Evaluation will be based on class and lab participation, weekly problem sets several short writing assignments and a final project.

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisite: A high school algebra course or signature of instructor.  Lab fee: $10.  Class limit: 24.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES QR"
"This course is an introduction to some of the central questions, arguments, and concepts of Cultural Anthropology. Broadly defined, “cultural anthropology” is the study of human cultures. Historically, such study has focused on explorations of difference through conducting fieldwork over an extended period of time in a specific community. Understandings of the discipline have changed over time, from definitions of it as an objective social science in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, when anthropology was dominated by European and U.S. anthropologists conducting fieldwork in places in Africa, Latin America and Asia, to definitions of it as a subjective interpretative social science that has been transformed and critiqued by anthropologists across the globe studying a wide range of human cultures and institutions, including their own societies. In the 1970s and 1980s, anthropologists began to “study up” through focusing on cultures of entities such as the World Bank, corporations, the military, scientists and investment bankers. Today, almost anything can be a focus for anthropological study.

In this class we will address questions and arguments about structure, difference, power, colonialism, politics, representation and responsibility, both in terms of cultural anthropology’s own formation as a colonial discipline, and in terms of the tools for critical thinking that have emerged out of anthropological work. What kinds of social organization and economic systems tie people together? What produces conflict? What is the significance of myths, rituals and symbols? How are social systems reproduced over time? How do they change? What is the significance of relations of identification and interaction between individuals and group categories? What are the political implications of how the human is defined? As we learn about how different thinkers have engaged these questions, we will also critically examine the concepts that inform them, including ideas of agency, responsibility, representation and action. Texts will likely include work by Ruth Benedict, Lee D. Baker, Franz Boas, Jacques Derrida, Emile Durkheim, Michel Foucault, Sigmund Freud, Clifford Geertz, Zora Neale Hurston, Alfred Kroeber, Claude Levi-Strauss, Karl Marx, Sidney Mintz, Rosalind Morris, Anand Pandian, Gayle Rubin, Marshall Sahlins, Edward Said, Marilyn Strathern, Deborah Thomas, Michel-Rolph Trouillot, Victor Turner, and Eric Wolf. Course work will include engaging with ethnographic writing and ethnographic research methods, as well as with transdisciplinary encounters with anthropology, including work in literature, philosophy, feminist and postcolonial theory. Students will be evaluated on individual and small group ethnographic research and writing assignments, class participation, and weekly reading responses.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 15. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: HS."
"This course is an exploration into the history of the still image in reportage style work. We’ll explore the ways news-gathering techniques, ethical considerations and the impact of the image itself have changed over time. We’ll look at the work of iconic documentary image-makers and read critical writings about the social, economic and other forces at work. We’ll also look at the power relationships established my market forces and political climates that influenced what stories were told and by whom. We’ll also explore the evolution of documentary work in the contemporary world of the citizen journalist and the so-called “hypermedia” environment. There will be considerable reading, looking at the work of historical and contemporary practitioners and weekly shooting assignments. One longer, final project will be expected.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate.  Prerequisites: Introduction to Photography or similar experience. Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $100.  Meets the following degree requirements: AD"
"Students acquire fundamental skills and techniques for drawing from direct observation utilizing subjects such as still life, landscape, and architecture. There is a strong emphasis on realistically representing form, light, depth, proportion, and scale. Analysis of drawings, criticisms, and classroom discussions expand the students' vocabulary and knowledge of drawing. Concept development will be accomplished using sketchbooks, thumbnails, and quick sketches. Evaluation will depend on drawing projects and participation in class discussions and critiques. The lab fee covers all course materials.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $90.  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS."
"This course provides students with an introduction to both economic theory and the historical and institutional background needed to understand the context, functioning, and trajectory of 21st Century economies. On the theoretical side, students will be introduced to explanations of the economic behavior of individuals and firms (microeconomics) and the workings of national economies and money (macroeconomics), including economic development and international topics such as trade and exchange rates. In addition to the standard neoclassical approaches to these topics, we will also introduce behavioral, feminist, Marxist, and ecological economics perspectives. Complementing these theoretical approaches will be a rich immersion in historical and institutional themes such as the history of capitalism, the rise of corporations, the institutional background of markets for stocks, bonds, and derivatives, inequality and poverty, state-led capitalism (e.g. as seen in China and Brazil) and the events that led up to recent financial crises in the United States and Europe. Evaluation will be based on bi-weekly problem sets, a final exam, and various forms of classroom participation. Learning will be facilitated by a weekly lab session that will be scheduled the first week of the term.  

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: none.  Class limit: 20.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS, QR"
"Mathematical models are an essential tool in epidemiology. Models are used in a number of ways, including: to predict the course of an epidemic; to estimate key epidemiological parameters; to determine an optimal vaccination strategy; or to gain a general, qualitative understanding of the salient features of the dynamics of a disease. This course will focus on differential equations, a class of mathematical models used across the sciences to model quantities that change continuously in time. The course will begin with a short introduction to differential equations. We will then step through the full “pipeline” of mathematical modeling using epidemiology as a case study. We will begin with a first-principles derivation of several models and will consider how the natural history of an infectious disease influences modeling choices. We will then see how to solve and analyze differential equations computationally. We will then cover how to calibrate a model to epidemiological data and estimate key model parameters in a principled way. Finally, we will see how to create model projections for different intervention scenarios and will explore the strengths and limitations of a mathematical model in relation to given research and policy questions. Through this process, students will gain skills and experiences that will apply to mathematical modeling in a range of settings across the natural and social sciences.

In addition to learning the mathematics of differential equations applied to epidemiology, a central goal of this course is to gain skills necessary for research in the mathematical, natural, and social sciences. This includes conceptualizing and framing a research question, formulating a model to explore that question, engaging with peer-reviewed research publications, and giving a research presentation and preparing a short technical report.

Evaluation will be based on class participation, problem sets and programming exercises, and a term-long project culminating in a research presentation and short technical report.

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: Calculus II or the equivalent or permission of instructor. Prior experience with either R or python. Class limit: 16. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: ES, QR."
"Feminist Therapy is focused on empowerment through self-awareness and self-assertion as shaped by an understanding of the larger social and political constructs that influence our thoughts and behaviors. In practice the application of feminist therapy synthesizes tenets of gender-based psychology, psychosocial theories of lifespan development, multicultural analysis, and applied social change activism with the objective of self evolution in relation to personal, social, political, and cultural exchanges.
This course offers an overview of the origins and applications of feminist therapy as a conceptual framework developed in response to androcentric therapies. We will begin by acknowledging the forerunners of feminist therapy such as Karen Horney and Leta Stetter Hollingworth. We will continue studying the contributions of contemporary feminist therapists such as Ellyn Kaschak, Lenore E. Walker, Jean Baker Miller, and Laura Brown, including prominent contributions by women of color in clinical psychology such as the work of Ruth Winifred Howard and Ellen Kitch Childs, and those who are currently pioneering the development of women’s psychology in other countries such as Vindhya Undurti. We will explore the core principles of feminist therapy, and the influences and implications of power and gender biases at play in clinical practice throughout assessment, diagnosis, and treatment. Students will have the opportunity to learn about feminist therapeutic techniques.
The objective of the course is to aid students in developing a functional knowledge of feminist therapy and its various clinical applications. Students who have a desire to pursue psychotherapy and social work are encouraged to consider this course as a means of understanding the benefit of feminist therapy in the development of egalitarian therapeutic relationships.
The class format includes lectures, roleplays, media presentations, interviews with guest speakers, group work, and discussions. Opportunities will be provided for students to reflect upon experiences, to practice skills, and apply learning through a community project.
Students will be evaluated on their critical thinking, analysis, and synthesis of the course goals and objectives as demonstrated by participation in class activities, responsiveness to required and suggested readings as evidenced by successful completion of course assignments and active participation in lecture generated discussion.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: Introductory Psychology and/or courses in Feminist Theory. Class Limit: 12. Lab Fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"In this course, students will learn how to ask relevant field science questions, how to collect samples in the field (soil, water, air, plant, plankton, sediment), and how to process the samples in the lab (sieving, counting, digesting, extracting), how to turn those samples into data points, and how to communicate the findings. When technical field skills are necessary for sample collection, we will offer co-curricular instruction (knot tying, canoeing for lake sediment coring, kayaking for water sampling, etc). This course will cover microplastic analysis in water and soils, water chemistry (ions, pH, organic pollutants), and charcoal analysis in sediments. Students will be evaluated based on participation in field sampling, lab processing, and lecture discussions, as well as through regular problem sets and a term-long writing project. Students will need waterproof shoes, sturdy hiking boots, raingear (rain pants and raincoat) and appropriate layers (synthetic or wool) for spending prolonged periods of time outside. If students do not have their own personal gear we can provide it for them if we are informed by the start of the course. All technical equipment (canoes, lifejackets, coring equipment) will be provided.

This course is not permission of instructor, but it is linked to a pre-matriculation summer STEM program. All seats will be reserved for first year students. As was done last year, admitted students will be invited to join the pre-matriculation summer STEM program. Students who join the summer STEM program (this will happen prior to registration) will be given priority to join the class. If there are open seats not taken by students doing the summer STEM program, then these seats can be made available to other incoming first year students when they register.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 10.  Lab fee: $0.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES, QR."
"This hands-on course will introduce the student to glass as an artistic material. The weekly schedule includes a lecture on campus and a four-hour lab off campus at a professional art glass studio.  Work in the studio will focus on learning the basic skills necessary to complete simple blown glass forms. Students will learn basic glass blowing techniques including gathering glass from the furnace, using hand tools, and creating different shapes on the blowpipe. An ongoing emphasis on shop safety will be maintained during demonstrations of the proper use of equipment and tools.  In addition to glass blowing, students will be instructed to complete projects using slumping and enameling kilns, diamond lapidary saws, a sand blasting cabinet, and water fed grinders.  The weekly lecture will focus on the historical evolution of glass working methods, from the first hollow core vessels to contemporary art glass by Dale Chihuly or Beth Lipman. Students will be evaluated based on attendance, regular reviews of the student's sketchbook, the ability to make five basic vessel shapes, and a final sculptural project.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: none. Class limit: 10. Lab Fee: $250 (covers energy, glass, and exhaustive materials employed in the studio, such as wooden blocks, kevlar gloves etc.). Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"This course is a fundamental study in guitar chord construction, note reading, chord symbol identification, fingerboard facility, theory as related to guitar, chord inversions, and scale and mode work.  Students are expected to attain introductory improvisational skills and basic facility in practical guitar performance.

Level: Introductory. Students must provide own instruments (acoustic or electric). Class limit: 20.  Lab fee: $10.  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS"
"The main goal of this course is to guide students to produce interesting, accurate, well-written, compelling articles about people, processes, and events. The course aims to give students an understanding of the principles of American journalism, the structure of journalistic writing, the techniques for identifying, sourcing, and gathering information, and insight into how news is disseminated and read, watched, or listened to in the digital age.
Students will produce several short articles for the course, learning the basics of story development, interviewing, research, and covering meetings and events. Students will be tasked with thinking critically, understanding and using news judgment, and developing skills for efficiency and self-critique. They will be introduced to the history of American journalism, the ethics and laws specific to the field, and the modern media landscape. Students will also learn about and practice photojournalism. A final project in the course will include significant research and utilize students’ skills in interviewing, observation, and documentation learned over the term. 
Students will be evaluated on the following criteria: the quality of their reporting, the effectiveness of their revisions, and participation in class discussions and peer review sessions. Students taking this course should have sufficient sentence structure, grammatical, and word usage skills to communicate effectively in writing. Students that are not confident in those areas may enroll, but should strongly consider taking the course for credit/no credit.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: none.  Meets the following degree requirements: W"
"From the metaphysical landscapes of Jorge Luis Borges and Julio Cortázar to the alienated anti-cities of María Louisa Bombal and Gabriel García Márquez, Latin American fiction writers expanded the shores of narrative and, in doing so, illustrated the power of language to create and define reality.  In the ""Boom"" years (roughly 1950s-1980s), Latin American novelists sought to create books that, while being worlds unto themselves, richly illustrated the complex history of the Americas.   These are works of origins, colonization, exploitation, brutality, magic, love, loss, and struggles to survive. The ""Post Boom"" novelists looked to class struggle, the power structures of gender relationships, and urban poverty in order to weave new narratives and ways of seeing the postcolonial world.  As an introductory course, we will familiarize ourselves with the varied landscapes of Latin American fiction.  We will learn to analyze and understand literary works in historical and cultural context.  We will look to the words of: Borges, Cortázar, Bombal, Márquez, Bolaño, Allende, Donoso, Valenzuela, Rulfo, and Arriaga to aid us on our journey.  Students will be evaluated on completion of a midterm essay,  a final project, and class participation.

Level:  Introductory.  Prerequisites: none. Class limit: 15  Lab Fee: none.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"This course provides an introductory lens to understand the economy as a whole – the macroeconomy – and how its various parts interact. We will study topics such as (i) the short-term fluctuation of the general price level, employment level, and total output level, (ii) the linkages between structural unemployment, economic inequality, and government policies, and (iii) the long-term trajectory of economic growth and the unevenness of capitalist development. Some of the key questions we will explore include: How do we measure the macroeconomy, and what do our conventional measurements often leave out? Why do cyclical economic booms and busts exist and what drives them? What can governments do to limit the costs of job loss on workers? Looking globally, why are some countries rich and other countries poor? How have global living standards improved over the long run, and at what cost to humans, non-human beings, and the environment?

This course aims to increase your ability to use abstract, quantitative models to describe and articulate the various ways in which macroeconomic factors frame the condition of possibilities for people, their families, and their communities. Upon completion of this course, you will have developed practices of thinking critically and politically about public policies and debates. You will also expand your capacity for numerical literacy and quantitative skills such as drawing valid conclusions based on data and communicating your reasoning and results effectively and clearly. The course is especially valuable for students with interests in civic engagement, social justices, political transformation, and sustainable development. Previous knowledge in economics, calculus, statistics, and linear algebra is not necessary. Familiarity with elementary algebra will be helpful but not required. Students’ learning will be assessed through problem sets, and take-home exams.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS, QR."
"Economics has a popular reputation as a field of study centered around making money and getting rich. However, for most of its history, economics has been about understanding and changing the way the world works. How do we get our dinner every night? What does it take to transform coffee beans harvested in plantations in Costa Rica to the morning cup of Starbucks across their 38,000 global locations? Why do some individuals amass unfathomable personal wealth while others face daily struggle for material survival? These questions are what economists primarily study. Whether seemingly straightforward or seemingly unfathomable, at their core these issues are about the process of social provisioning. It can be further broken down into the following questions: (i) As a society, how do we determine what to produce and how much? (ii) As a society, how do we distribute what we produce? And (iii) Who benefits from and who are harmed by our production, distribution and consumption? In this course, we will examine these questions from the perspective of individuals and firms, and we will consider the ways an individual’s preference and decisions are shaped by social institutions and how they, in turn, affect other beings, both human and non-human. You will be introduced to topics such as: individual’s decision making under constraints, social coordination dilemmas, firm’s wage-setting and labor discipline, supply-demand and price setting, market’s successes and failures, and the limits of economic growth. This course aims to increase your ability to use abstract, quantitative models to approach complex, real-world problems such as worsening economic inequalities and global climate change. Upon completion of this course, you will have developed practices of thinking critically and politically about public policies and debates. You will also expand your capacity for numerical literacy and quantitative skills such as drawing valid conclusions based on data and communicating your reasoning and results effectively and clearly. The course is especially valuable for students with interests in civic engagement, social justices, political transformation, and sustainable development. Knowledge in calculus, statistics, and linear algebra is not necessary, and familiarity with elementary algebra will be helpful but not required. Students’ learning will be assessed through problem sets and (take-home) exams.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: Knowledge in calculus, statistics, and linear algebra is not necessary, and familiarity with elementary algebra will be helpful but not required. Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS, QR."
"In this course you will gain a practitioner-level framework for understanding regulatory, policy, and collaborative mechanisms used to solve complex and multi-jurisdictional ecological problems in the United States. We will focus on the roles of tribal, federal and state governments in the most current inland fisheries and wildlife management issues. Through weekly case studies you will analyze and evaluate natural resources decision-making, and practice policy analysis for the purpose of recommending management decisions. We will address an array of themes including but not limited to the alignment of jurisdictions to collaboratively solve problems, the role of tribal sovereignty in creating policy change, the influence of nonprofits and the public, and political extremism. The goals of this course are: 1) to provide students with a practitioner-level framework for natural resources management in the U.S. and 2) to provide an opportunity for students to develop and refine qualitative analytical skills. Students will be evaluated based on weekly papers, participation, and a final presentation. Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. While this course is designed specifically for students who are seeking a career in natural resources, any seeking to increase understanding of natural resources decision-making are encouraged to enroll.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None Class limit: 15. Lab fee: None"
"This course introduces students to the structure and function of the mammalian nervous system with emphasis on the human brain and its connection to behavior, health and disease.  Topics covered by the course include structure and function of nerve cells, synaptic transmission, gross organization of the brain, sensory and motor systems, emotion, memory systems and diseases of the brain.  This course has two lecture/discussion sessions per week and students are evaluated on class participation, two take-home exams, and a class presentation.

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: Biology: Cellular Processes or equivalent, and permission of instructor. Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: none."
"Planet Earth is misnamed. Seawater covers approximately 70% of the planet's surface, in one giant all-connected ocean. This ocean has a profound effect on the planet's climate, chemistry, ecosystem, and energy resources. Billions of years ago life began there, in what now we regard as the last unexplored frontier of this planet.  In this course we examine the various disciplines within oceanography, including aspects of geology and sedimentology, chemical, dynamic and biological oceanography. The course concludes with an introduction to marine ecosystems examined at various trophic levels, including phyto/zooplankton, fish and other macrofauna. Fieldwork (weather dependent) includes trips on RV Indigo, trips to intertidal and estuarine ecosystems, and possible visits to the college's islands, Mount Desert Rock and Great Duck Island. Evaluation will be by lab, quizzes and a final paper.

Level: Introductory. Lab fee: $200. Class limit: 15. Meets the following degree requirements: ES"
"This course aims to familiarize students with the foundational principles and techniques of painting. Students will gain knowledge of painting tools, fundamental color mixing, composition, form, and spatial relationships through diverse activities. Students will engage with various subjects, including still life, interiors, abstraction, and self-portraiture, while questioning the canon and debating the discipline's ability to embrace other voices or perspectives. In this class, acrylic will be the primary medium. However, we will also explore other non-painting materials. Evaluation will be based on painting projects, and participation in class discussions and critiques. 

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 12. Lab fee: $80."
"What is the mind and how does it relate to the body? This two-part question will guide the structure of this introductory course in the philosophy of mind. Other questions that will arise include how can the mind influence the body? Is this distinction between mind and body deep? Is there a single discipline that can tell us what the mind is and, if not, why not? Is science of help? What strategy or method is best suited to understanding the mind? Do other cultures or religions offer insight? Is the mind inherently mysterious and unknowable? 

Attempts to understand the mind have vexed and stimulated philosophers, scientists, and others since at least as far back as Descartes. Starting with his work, we'll explore classic and contemporary texts in western thought, with particular focus on philosophy, but with some psychology, neuroscience and non-western thought. We will cover a number of theories and our own assumptions about this basic and fundamental feature of human life. Some of the main accounts students will gain familiarity with include dualism, materialism, panpsychism, emergence, and phenomenology.

Evaluation will be based on participation, two short response essays, a midterm essay, a final essay, and a final presentation. 

Level: Introductory/Intermediate.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"Photography is a common language spoken across cultural, economic and geographical boundaries - used in news gathering, commerce and fine art.  Being able to use the camera as an effective tool for self expression or in the pursuit of a documentary project is a skill which is applicable to a large number of COA students.  A broad introduction to photography and digital printing,  this course will introduce the principles and applied techniques of contemporary photographic practices.  Designed to put the student in charge of their camera, we'll begin with basic camera controls such as aperture and shutter speed and progress on to more advanced topics such as the proper use of 'flash'.  Also covered will be an introduction to Adobe Photoshop and/or Adobe Lightroom as well as good printing practices in a digital environment. Students will be evaluated on the quality of finished prints included in a final portfolio, their participation in class exercises and critiques and individual growth over the course of the term. Please note that camera equipment will not be provided. Students will need to use their own DSLR camera (with adjustable shutter speeds and f-stops) or borrow this equipment from the library which is typically lent in 4 hour blocks of time.  

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: none. Lab Fee: $110.  Class Limit: 13.  Meets the following requirements: ADS"
"This course will engage with postcolonialism as a field of academic inquiry and culture critique in a globalized world, especially as a tool to analyze postcolonial literature. We seek to understand how multiple histories and different aspects of colonialism inform the content and form of the fiction we read and our lives today. Postcolonialism, with its interdisciplinary approach, offers a lens to look at imperial literature and the new literature produced in the former colonies of Africa, South Asia, the Caribbean, and the like. The course will begin with a brief history and exploration of the word “post-colonial” before moving on to look at some of the significant issues and intersections in the field, such as the questions of language, nation, gender, and otherness, among others. The texts by Chinua Achebe, Salman Rushdie, Jean Rhys, accompanied by theorists like Frederic Jameson, Aijaz Ahmad, and Gayatri Spivak, will create a balance where we will use the theoretical pieces as a lens to read and parse out the major and, in some senses, representative postcolonial texts. You will be evaluated on class participation and written assignments like discussion posts, a book review, an annotated bibliography, and a short paper.

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"Computer science is about discovering accurate solutions to interesting, challenging problems that have real-world impact, and about representing the solutions in a precise way so that computers can assist with solving the problems. This course explores computational thinking and problem solving via an introduction to computer programming. Students learn the fundamentals of programming using Python, including basic data structures, flow control structures, functions, recursion, elementary object-oriented programming, and discussion of higher-level concepts including abstraction, modularity, testing, and debugging.

Like many fields of study, computing does not occur in a vacuum, but has real social, environmental, and political implications; whether it be the carbon footprint of running Google’s language model, BERT, or how missing data undermines equitable societies. Through reflection and class discussion we will engage in contemporary issues in equity and social justice related to our digital world, community, and identity. This course is intended to appeal to a wide range of students. The computing skills learned in class are language independent, thus this class will be helpful for students interested in computing, regardless of the languages and domains they’ll end up working in. The skills and habits of mind taught in this course are applicable to the sciences, arts, social sciences, and beyond and lay the foundation for future computing courses and varied computational applications such as generative art, software development, bioinformatics, and sensor and app design.

Evaluation will be based on several short homework and lab assignments inspired by real-world problems, weekly reflections, and a final creative project.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 16.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: QR."
"This multi-disciplinary course will explore a breadth of human sexuality topics drawing from public health theories, prevention education practices, feminist scholarship, and queer activism. Prevention education promotes the knowledge, attitudes, and skills necessary for a sexually healthy population and seeks to prevent the spread of disease and violence. In addition to educating individuals in how to engage in health promoting behaviors, effective prevention education takes into consideration cultures that inhibit or facilitate health. Prevention education supports policies, practices, and norms that create an environment where all populations can thrive.
The World Health Organization defines sexual health as, “a state of physical, emotional, mental and social well-being in relation to sexuality; it is not merely the absence of disease, dysfunction or infirmity. Sexual health requires a positive and respectful approach to sexuality and sexual relationships, as well as the possibility of having pleasurable and safe sexual experiences free from coercion, discrimination and violence…” With this definition in mind we will discuss topics including sexual health and reproduction, sexual identity, intimacy, sensuality, and sexualization. Sources of discussion may include the social-ecological model of health, theories from twentieth century sex researchers such as William Masters and Virginia Johnson, tactics of sexual health activists such as ACT UP, feminist writers such as Audre Lorde, and web-based sex education platforms such as Afrosexology and Amaze. From discussions students can expect to examine their personal attitudes, gain up-to-date knowledge and resources, and grow their skills for promoting sexual health in their lives and communities. This course may be most helpful for students interested in working in the fields of sexual and interpersonal violence prevention, HIV prevention, or reproductive health. Students will be evaluated based on class participation, two papers, and a final project. This is an online course and will be taught using platforms for synchronous and asynchronous discussions.

Level: Introductory: Prerequisites: None. Class Limit: 12. Lab Fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"Have you always wanted to write an original song, but don’t know where to start? Or perhaps you have been writing songs for years and would like a different perspective. Wherever you are in your musical journey, you are welcome in this course! Join singer songwriter Caroline Cotter for an adventure in songwriting that explores the power of songs and provides different approaches to crafting a song that truly speaks to your ideas and emotions. Caroline shares her own process on finding inspiration and crafting songs that have the power to move you and others. There will be opportunities for free writing, listening and dissecting songs from all genres, song sharing, group feedback, co-writing, and lots of experimenting in a supportive and safe environment. For a final project, students will present their final work in their choice of an audio recording, video recording, or live performance. Evaluation will be based on class participation, completion of written assignments, and the final project.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"This course introduces the basics of statistical analysis that can be used in either a scientific or a social science frame of reference.  While this course teaches you to perform both nonparametric and simple parametric analysis both by hand and computer, an emphasis will be placed on understanding the principles and assumptions of each test, rather than mathematical ability per se.  We will also learn how to report statistical results in journal format, and there will be plenty of lab time to sharpen skills.  Evaluation is based on lab participation, three quizzes, and a team project.  

Level: Introductory/Intermediate.  Prerequisites:  A college mathematics course, or signature of the instructor.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: $60.  Meets the following degree requirements: QR"
"The ""law"" affects every aspect of human activity.  As human ecologists we must garner some basic understanding of how law is used (or misused) to shape society and human behavior.  This course examines two aspects of the American legal system:  1) the judicial process or how we resolve disputes; and 2) the legislative process or how we enact policy.  Course readings cover everything from classic jurisprudence essays to the daily newspaper.  We use current environmental and social issues to illustrate specific applications of the legal process.  Legal brief preparation, mock courtroom presentations, lobbying visits to the Maine legislature, and guest lectures are used to give a practical dimension to course subjects.  Students analyze Federal Election Commission documents to understand the impact of campaign financing on public policy and look closely at other current issues facing the legislative and judicial systems.  Evaluation is based upon two papers and several other exercises.  

Level: Introductory.  Offered every other year.  Class limit: 20.  Lab fee $25.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"This intensive, field-based course examines fundamental concepts and processes of tropical ecology through exploration and investigation of a diverse array of bioclimatic zones found within the Central American country of Costa Rica. Students will spend extensive time in the field learning the biotic diversity of each region through observation and application of field techniques. Students will then integrate these field experiences with readings from the primary literature and classic works to contemplate and discuss current topics in tropical ecology. Primary emphasis in this course will be placed on the vertebrate fauna of Costa Rica, with arthropod diversity and ecology addressed in the Tropical Entomology course. The course will visit Caribbean slope rainforest, pre-montane forest, montane cloud forest, Pacific slope dry forest, Pacific wet forest, and Pacific beach/marine communities. Non-travel days will typically consist of early morning to early/mid-afternoon field time, afternoon lectures, or discussions followed by early evening to late night field time. Evaluation will be based on quality of work associated with a series of field-based independent research projects, level of engagement in class discussions, and overall commitment to all aspects of this immersion experience. Permission of Instructor required. Previous coursework in the areas of ecology, organismal biology, or natural history will be taken into account during the selection process. 

This course is part of a three-credit expeditionary program in neotropical field ecology. Students must enroll in all three courses.

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: Co-enrollment in ES3100 Tropical Entomology and MD1032 The Art and Practice of the Natural History Field Journal, and permission of instructor. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: $1,600 (for all three courses). Meets the following degree requirements: ES."
"Nearly 80% of all described species belong to the class Insecta.  Due to their abundance, diversity and adaptability, insects are crucial components of terrestrial, freshwater and human-made ecosystems.  Students with a background in entomology can apply their knowledge of insects to many other fields, including botany, ecology, anthropology, epidemiology and medicine, agriculture, climate change, visual arts, history, and even the culinary arts.  This course will give students a sampling of entomological applications within these diverse fields.  Students will be given a solid introduction to insect biology, ecology, taxonomy and identification through lectures, lab sessions and field trips.  They will assemble their own insect collections and will learn to identify all Maine insect orders and many common insect families.  Lectures, field trips and readings will emphasize the important role of insects in human lives and our impact on the environment.  Students will be evaluated on their insect collections, performance on lab quizzes, participation and one paper with presentation.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate.  Prerequisites: Bio 1 or permission of instructor.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee $35.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES"
"This course helps beginners develop basic proficiencies in all four skill areas - listening, speaking, reading and writing - using a workshop format drawing on the internet resources and pedagogical methods of the French language institute at CAVILAM in Vichy, France.  In addition, through readings and discussions, students will learn some fundamental concepts about the cultures and literatures of French-speaking areas of the world. The class meets four times a week for 1.5 hours each day. Class time will be devoted to lectures, pair work, small- and large-group discussions, use of internet resources, and extensive written and oral practice of structure and vocabulary.  Students will be evaluated through written and oral tests, class participation, short papers, and oral presentations.  

Level:  Introductory.  Prerequisite: Placement exam required to confirm level.  Class size: 15.  Course fee: $25."
"This course is a phylogenetic survey of the major groups of animals without backbones. These animals range in size from single cells to giant squids, and they include the vast majority of animals on earth. Using text readings, assigned articles, and one afternoon per week of field/lab work, students gain an understanding of the classification, physiology, ecology, evolutionary relationships, and economic significance of this remarkably diverse collection of organisms. Students are evaluated on lab notebooks, weekly homework assignments, and two short research projects.

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisites:  Biology: Form and Function and Biology: Cellular Processes of Life, or signature of instructor.  Offered every other year.  Class limit: 16.  Lab fee $25.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES"
"Islands have played a major role in the development of ecological and evolutionary theory. Most recently, islands have served as an important metaphor in the development of conservation biology. Maine is blessed with a plethora of islands -between 4500 and 6000 at the last count- and the history and pre-history of these islands is intimately entwined with that of the continent itself. This course examines historical and current interpretations of island biogeography and the interplay between natural and human history and human ecology. The class will be taught as a combination of term-time seminar and in the field, based on the College's field station on Great Duck Island and the College's research vessel. During the Spring term we will be meeting regularly to examine the theoretical basis of Island Biogeography and islands as the subject of scientific and literary discussion since Aristotle. Readings will include Darwin, Alfred Russell Wallace, and contemporary authors.  In late August we will re-convene for the field component of the class. During the first half of this component, we will be focusing primarily on Great Duck Island and its immediate surroundings, learning and applying theoretical approaches to islands' landscapes, with extensive reading from the primary literature. During the second half of the class, we will move further afield, exploring a variety of islands in eastern Maine, and relating our observations to theoretical predictions. Ultimately we hope to travel to Grand Manan Island in the Bay of Fundy to observe a large island community, see the traditional weir fishery, and observe firsthand migrating right and humpback whales, and northern seabirds. Evaluation based on participation, quizzes and a term project. 

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: Permission of instructor; knowledge of boat-handling and/or significant experience on the water is recommended. Class limit: 8. Lab fee: $500, which helps cover food  and travel for the field component of the course. Meets the following degree requirements: ES, HY."
"14,000 years of Human Ecology on the Coast of Maine
The coast of Maine is an ideal location for studies of the effects of changing ecologies, landscapes, and cultures on the human experience. 14000 years ago, the entire area was covered with a dense ice sheet, and at present we are facing the uncertain future of Global Warming. Between these points, the coast and islands have experienced flood, fire, earthquakes, and an enormous range of human and non-human occupants. This team-taught course will use the inter-disciplinary lens of Human Ecology to examine the consequences, implications, and potential meanings of our dwelling within both this particular landscape and other landscapes perhaps initially more familiar to students. A strong emphasis will be placed upon developing a ""sense of place"" through the examination of a novel, scientific writing, art, and experiential venturing upon the land and seas, learning about the history, culture, ecology, oceanography and geology of the Maine coastline, both in and by the ocean. Although a substantial element of each day's work will take the form of field trips, included extended stays on off-shore islands,  students will also be responsible for readings, attending a series of lectures by faculty and local experts, and working with multimedia forms. Interest in ecology, the visual arts, writing, and public lands are strongly encouraged. Students will be evaluated based on class participation, a daily log of their experiences plus several short ""response pieces"" to assigned readings, and drawings and paintings capturing some aspect of their learning. Students will receive narrative evaluations and a grade of CREDIT or NO CREDIT.

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 14"
"In this intermediate-level course we will form a medium-sized ensemble to rehearse and perform jazz music. Some prior experience with improvisation is required, as well as an ability to read music or to learn quickly by ear. Rehearsals will focus on playing with good time, intonation, feel, blend, while respecting various stylistic and historical elements of jazz. Emphasis will be placed on improvisation, which will be taught from the ground up with a focus on ear-training and harmony. There will be a concert performance toward the end of the term and there is the potential for additional off-campus performances and jam sessions. Students will be evaluated based on attendance, commitment to learning the material, successful completion of assigned work, and the expansion of improvisational ability. Participants of diverse abilities, needs, and backgrounds are encouraged to apply, including those who play non-traditional jazz instruments. This course is scheduled from 11:10-2:25 with a break for lunch. The second studio block will at times be used for small group work and other assignments as needed. 

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: Some improvisation experience; Ability to read music or learn music quickly by ear. Class limit: 8. Lab fee: $30. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"During the 1930s, the French-Romani guitarist Django Reinhardt launched a new musical style. Combining the traditional music of his Romani heritage with French bal-musettes and the Swing music storming Europe from the other side of the Atlantic, Reinhardt pioneered a sound that came to be known as “Gypsy Jazz,” “Jazz Manouche” or “Hot Club Jazz.” This class will focus on the rich musical repertoire flowing from this history as we work to practice, perform, and learn about its sounds and histories. A practice-based course organized around learning and performing the music, it will treat a series of compositions as entry points for lessons in jazz improvisation, understanding harmonic motion, chord voicing, and rhythmic awareness (swing, waltz, bossa, bolero, etc.). In addition to practice-based work, students will also learn about the histories of Romani (Sinti) migration across Europe and the genealogies of musicians as they relate to the development of Jazz Manouche. Students will read texts concerning Django Reinhardt and other key figures and will write a final paper that reflects research into the people, places, and sounds associated with this music. Assessment will be based on class participation, weekly practice logs, and the final paper/project. The course is designed for students with a working knowledge of an acoustic instrument (guitar, strings, bass, percussion, accordion, mandolin, woodwinds, brass, percussion, etc.). The class will be held largely outdoors, so we cannot accommodate piano or electric instruments. Permission of instructor is required to ensure a workable balance of instruments. 

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: Permission of instructor and working knowledge of an instrument.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $35.  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS"
"This course is a survey of the particular styles of music that have had such a profound effect on America, as well as the world in the twentieth century.  Students inquire of the social, cultural, and aesthetic elements that led to the creation of each style.  The use of recorded examples provides a chronological examination of the principal musicians and composers as well as an analysis of the more influential soloists and groups.  The course includes technical background into the various common musical ""bonds of union"" between Jazz, Rock, and Blues, as well as discussion concerning the permeation of these characteristics into secular and non-secular music of the 1900s.  There is considerable study of the social significance of the music, exploration of the broad cultural and artistic aspects of the music, how these styles changed and evolved, and how their growth related to parallel changes in fine art music.  

Level: Introductory.  Class is open to all students, regardless of musical experience. Lab fee: $10.  Meets the following degree requirements: HY, AD"
"This course will use the theme of the journey to select French language films for study that span the history of filmmaking. We will use these films and accompanying readings to study the ideas of crossing cultures and geographies (real or imagined). Particular focus will be given to films which look at events and themes which are historically and culturally important for the regions in which we will be studying. This portion of the class is designed to help students understand the new contexts in which they find themselves. In addition to film, other artforms and cultural experiences will be studied through museum visits and field trips. 
 
Students will also explore the form and nature of the illustrated travel journal, or carnet de voyage, and create a personal record of their travel abroad. We will survey the illustrated travel journal as an art, and as a record of cultural interaction through historic and contemporary examples shown in class, and through first-hand observation in museums and other cultural institutions in France. Readings will include criticism pertaining to representations of culture. This portion of the class is designed to enable students to reflect on changes in themselves as they adapt to new locations and circumstances.
 
Additionally, each student will choose a term-long research topic; they will process and share their research through several short papers and a final in-class presentation. Research can be related to a particular filmmaker or artist, an historical event or series of events of cultural importance, or a cultural concept such as collaboration, laïcité, or terroir. Vichy's extensive Médiathèque Valery Larbaud, Clermont-Ferrand's La Jetée (research library/archive of cinema materials, particularly related to the short film), and Paris' Cinémathèque française are examples of some of the places in which this research will occur.
 
Class participants will be given technical guidance as needed on their projects and will share their work during in-progress and final critiques. Students will be required to create a copy of their work in final form for submission and evaluation. Evaluation will be based on participation in class discussions and activities, and in the thoroughness, level of thought, creativity, and artistry in their multiple projects.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: Instructor permission; students who take this course must also be enrolled in the Immersion Program in French Language and Culture.  Class Limit: 12.  Meets the following degree requirements: AD"
"How can witnessing and reporting other worlds—whether a country, a village, a river, a mountain, or a back alley--make us more sensitive travelers, sharpen awareness of cultural biases, and empower place-based writing? This course highlights the allure, the dangers, uncertainties, risks, and joys of travel expressed in student writing. What words, images, foods, music, rituals, or other sources of inspiration spark curiosity and passions that make us want to go places?

Genre analysis, writing, and transdisciplinary research projects will deepen a sense of place as the course explores the rhetoric of travel and its transformative impacts.  Students will experiment with, for instance, flash-essays, chronicles, interviews, journals, and field notes. Research projects will spotlight judicious selection of relevant sources, integration of data, and inclusion of multimodal elements. We will consider, too, the relation between travel writing and ethnography, between travel and gender, racial, religious, and ethnic components. Conveying impressions after short or extended excursions, students will recognize and develop which rhetorical strategies are appropriate for particular purposes, situations, audiences, discourse communities, and genres. Maps, films, infographics, letters, newspaper articles, guidebooks, blogs, Instagram posts, diaries, and logs constitute genres that may be examined and created. Students will further hone their craft in writing workshops, conversations, conferences, and presentations.  

Short excerpts that reflect the intimate connection between travel and writing will be discussed, and the various rhetorical strategies employed by writers such as Matsuo Basho, Tu Fu, Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca, Olaudah Equiano, Mary Kingsley, James Baldwin, Maxine Hong Kingston, Taras Grescoe, Bill Bryson, Annie Dillard, William Least Heat-Moon, Anthony Bourdain, Eileen Myles, Binyavanga Wainaina, and Hans M. Carlson. Whether an Inuit film for global audiences, or the map of a route across the North American continent by water, or notes in a diary from the Hindu Kush, for example, the course materials do more than simply record or narrate experiences and territories: they also report and shape the world and what it means to us. 
Evaluations will be based on class discussions, writing projects, and presentations.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: W, HS."
"Kinetic Sculpture Introduction uses the Arduino microcontroller to explore light, sound, movement, and interactivity as tools for art making. Students will learn the basic principles of electronics and their myriad sculptural applications. The course will explore human and machinic sensing and how they converge in kinetic sculpture. This is a studio course that will be supplemented by lectures/presentations, video, critiques, and readings. Grading criteria will include craftsmanship, technical proficiency, aesthetic sensibility, critical thinking, and overall effort. This is a beginner level class, no prior experience in electronics is necessary.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: none. Class limit: 15. Lab fee: $50."
"Human resilience is inextricably linked to natural and engineered landscapes. This course asks students to examine our relationship to these terrains, and apply their learning through the design of a specific site. This course is fundamentally a landscape architecture studio with a focus on resilience and self-sufficiency at various scales and across multiple systems (water, food, shelter). Each student will select a local site, and generate a land-based strategy to support human subsistence. Throughout the course, weekly lectures will explore the traditional, contemporary, and emergent methods of shaping productive and performative landscapes. Students will be evaluated based on three milestone assignments - including the development of a final site model - as well as engagement with the course materials through discussion.

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisites: One or more of the following courses: Introduction to Arts and Design, Two-Dimensional Design, Trees and Shrubs, Sustainable Design in the Built Environment.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $100."
"This seminar focuses on the relationship between filmmakers and nature. From the opening question “What is landscape?” we will address through readings, screening theories, practices of eco-cinema, sonic ethnography, landscape theory, ecological filmmaking, and slow cinema that emerged in the second half of the twentieth century among artists working in film and that continue to evolve today. Students will make regular visits into their local landscape over the term in advance of a final essay, video, or sound piece and will be asked to write or film response pieces to topics addressed in class. At the end of the term, students will have a closer connection to the physical environment they live in and will leave the course with an understanding of the role nature and landscape has played in film history and contemporary film practice. Evaluation will be based on completion of field notes, short response pieces, a final project, and participation in class discussions that demonstrate critical encounters with readings, screenings, and the landscape around them.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: none. Class limit: 14.  Lab fee: $30. Meets the following degree requirements: AD"
"“The limits of my language are the limits of my world.” -Wittgenstein. 
This course serves as a broad introduction to contexts and methodologies for language learning, as well as contexts and mechanisms of language attrition and loss. The course explores language learning and acquisition in first-language, second-language, and multilingual contexts, as well as the impact of language loss on individuals and families. Course readings and discussion topics include: First-language acquisition in childhood; second language learning in school settings; additional language acquisition in immersion contexts; development of multiple languages in multilingual settings; patterns of bilingualism and contexts for language attrition and loss in communities, families, and individuals. Through reflective inquiry, students will explore central themes in language learning and acquisition, including motivation, instructional practices, language politics and stereotypes. Students will come to understand how languages are learned and acquired, as well as develop a perspective on how this knowledge can be used in education. Finally, students will engage in critical inquiry to examine the benefits and drawbacks of monolingualism and multilingualism, and take a position on language policy to promote language learning and/or prevent language loss. Evaluation for this course will consist of informal reflective journaling, assessment of in-class participation, a presentation on one of the course readings, and a final autoethnographic essay.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 15. Lab fee: None."
"In the fields of applied linguistics and education, there is a growing interest in the implications of mobility and human migration. In this course, students will be introduced to a number of concepts, contexts, and methods from these fields that deal with the nexus of language and education within the processes of transnational migration. They will read texts from these fields by scholars such as Suresh Canagarajah and Lisa Patel. In particular, this course will highlight the unique challenges, as well as affordances, at and across borders by featuring narratives from books, podcasts, short films, documentaries and/or guest speakers. These narratives will portray the educational and lived experiences of transnational individuals with different educational backgrounds and trajectories, individuals such as the exchange students, international students, students with immigrant or refugee backgrounds, students with families of migrant labor, undocumented students, etc. While trying gain a broader and deeper understanding of the experiences of transnational learners, students in this course will apply what they learn in a number of activities, such as class discussions and presentations, book/film reviews, interviews, project proposals targeting community partners that serve transnational learners, final projects involving narrative, arts-based, and/or (auto)ethnographic research methods.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisite: Prior coursework in language studies, linguistics and educational or social sciences is useful and strongly recommended. Class limit: 15. Lab Fee: $25."
"Computational text analysis (CTA) is an emerging field that uses computation to analyze texts. CTA draws on the fields of computer science, machine learning, computational linguistics, and literary theory. Using machine learning and statistics, computers can be used to explore how language is used in particular contexts, including how frequently different words are used, the sentiment of a word/text, as well as nuances in the ways words are associated with one another.

We will use CTA to engage in “Distant Reading”, a term coined by literary theorist Franco Moretti. Distant Reading stands in contrast to the more familiar “Close Reading”: a deep engagement with a particular text or a passage from a text. Distant Reading engages not with a particular text, but with a large corpus of texts: e.g., all novels published in English in the 20th century, all articles written in The New York Times and The Washington Post in the last decade, or the lyrics of all top-100 pop songs from the 1980s. Computational techniques applied to large collections of texts allow one to ask broad questions about structural and linguistic change over time and to look for patterns of language use that would not be evident from analysis of one or even several individual texts. Distant Reading, and computational text analysis more generally, is not intended to replace close reading, but to complement it.

We will use CTA to explore how power structures and systems—such as race, gender, and colonialism—manifest themselves in bodies of text. For example, CTA has been used to investigate Islamophobia, analyze race in US novels, explore settler colonialism in the Americas, and to investigate shifts in anti-Asian sentiments in the US brought on by the COVID crisis.

Students will who successfully complete this course will: 1) gain a conceptual understanding of various CTA techniques, including word frequency analysis, topic modeling, and sentiment analysis; 2) learn how to apply these techniques using pre-existing software and doing their own coding; 3) gain experience asking questions about power structures/systems—race, gender, colonialism—and how those structures manifest themselves in corpora of text; 4) learn how these questions of power can be explored using algorithmic methods; and 5) gain experience critiquing algorithmic methods through the lenses of race, gender, and colonialism.

Classes will be a mixture of lecture, group exercises, discussion, and live coding. Readings will include case studies and selections from literary theorists. Evaluation will be based on participation in discussion and in-class activities, several short coding/analysis exercises, several short reflection assignments, and a group project on a topic of the students’ choosing.

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: Either an introductory coding class (in any language) or a college-level course that introduced critical and/or literary theory. Students unsure about their background are encouraged to reach out to the instructors. Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS, QR."
"Since 1848, the border between the United States of America and Mexico has posed a cultural enigma. The literature of the people inhabiting this area reflects the diverse and complex society that has evolved over a period spanning almost 200 years. We will begin by reading selections from Neil Foley’s Mexicans in the Making of America and Gloria Anzaldúa’s Borderlands/La Frontera in order to locate ourselves geographically. We will then read a variety of contemporary Mexican and Latinx writers, whose work confronts the border from different perspectives and literary genres which may include: Octavio Paz, Ada Limón, Natalie Scenters-Zapico, Yuri Herrera, Carlos Fuentes, Tomás Rivera, Gloria Anzaldúa, Valera Luiselli, and Jeanine Cummins. We will also consider film (Chulas Fronteras, Espaldas mojadas, Backyard/El traspatio, Sin Nombre, A Touch of Evil) and music from the borderlands to aid in our study of this complex area of the world. Evaluation will be based on engagement with the materials and discussion, weekly written responses, a midterm essay and a final project. 

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None.  Class Limit: 15.  Lab fee: none.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"Residencia En La Tierra can be translated in many different ways: A Residency on Earth, Residence on Earth, Living on Earth. However, each distinct translation points us toward a single question: What does it mean to be at home on Earth? This is an introduction, in English translation, to the person considered by many to be the greatest Latin American poet of the 20th century, Pablo Neruda. Neruda’s poetry is marked by a series of aesthetic and political metamorphoses as he continually seeks to address the aforementioned question in his early love poems, political poems, sweeping historical works, odes, and nature poems. Like each of us, Neruda was a witness to history, and special attention will be devoted to that history, particularly in terms of the Spanish Civil War, The Cold War, and the Chilean coup. We will look at a broad selection of Neruda’s poetry, historical texts, as well as texts on literary translation. Students will be expected to complete weekly responses to class readings, group projects, a mid term drafted essay, and a final of the student’s own design. 

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: None"
"This course will cover the process of new venture creation for students interested in creating businesses or non-profits with substantial social and environmental benefit. It is designed for student teams who have an idea and want to go through the formal process of examining and launching the enterprise. Topics covered in this course will include: opportunity recognition, market research, creating a business plan, producing financial projections and venture financing. As part of the course, all students will make a formal business plan presentation.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Class limit: 15"
"The goal of this course to help each student design and implement an effective learning program for the study of a language of her choice at whatever level of learning she is currently at.  A very wide variety of  general strategies, resources and practical advice for independent language learning are reviewed in  weekly class sessions along with progress and reflection reports from each student that can help guide and motivate independent work. The core common text for this work will be Betty Lou Leaver, Madeline Ehrman and Boris Shekhtman’s ""Achieving Success in Second Language Acquisition"".  The primary focus of the class is on the development and implementation of each student’s individually designed plan for learning a language of their choice.  Materials for this will be identified by each student as part of their work on their chosen language. Progress in these plans are discussed in one on one weekly meetings with the teacher.  Plans may include the use of software, peer tutors, Skype, videos, standard texts, flash cards, specialized technical material, music, visual art, field trips, and a wide variety of other materials as appropriate.  Evaluation will be based on the clarity, coherence and effectiveness of the student’s developed plan and the discipline with which they actually pursue it and revise it appropriately as the term progresses. Students will be asked to meet with the instructor prior to the start of the term to discuss their motivation, aims, possible resources and possible plans for language learning after the course is over.  

Level: Variable.  Prerequisites: Permission of the instructor.  Class limit: 10.  Lab fee: $35. Meets the following degree requirements: HS."
"In this course, students will explore teaching and learning in the arts as a process of exploration, personal expression, and nurturance. This process, one of discovery, begins without preconceived expectations of outcomes and allows for response and reflection through the art-making. This approach will be explored as a means of teaching art to others, while also adding to one’s own creativity and artistic growth. Students will work with the elements and principles of design, using a variety of techniques and materials (drawing, painting, collage) to understand and teach the art process. We will create some shared work in class, such as narrative memory maps and contour-drawn portraits, in order to experience the art process in collaboration. Students will also explore the ecology and economy of altering found materials for art-making, as well as investigate creative ways to use text and writing in art (Exquisite Corpse, Allen Ginsberg’s American Sentences, Black-Out Poetry.) Relevant artists’ writings and work will be read and discussed in class. Evaluation will be based on attendance, participation, class activities, and completed assignments. Assignments will include: co-leading discussions of class readings, ongoing work in personal sketchbooks, responses and creative writing exercises in journals, and altering an old book (we’ll use discarded library books) to create a source book of techniques for teaching and making art.

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: None."
"Markets are the dominant form of economic organization in the world today: particularly in the Global North, the vast majority of people sell their specialized labor to earn money, and use the money to obtain, via markets, the goods and services they need or desire. However, since the earliest days of capitalistic production, there were voices that articulated deep-seated critiques of capitalism while finding value in non-commodified production and consumption. These voices are still with us today, along with those who seek to act on such critiques by meeting much of their material needs through non-market means such as self-production, acts of reciprocity, and, and gift exchange. This course examines theories, concepts, and experiences centered on this practice of ""leaving capitalism"": seeking food, shelter, and clothing to the greatest degree possible through non-commodified production and consumption, in places where commodified production and consumption are the dominant norms.  We will examine counter-hegemonic activities, particularly homesteading, that seek to restore visible, non-exploitive relationships to production activities, thus challenging commodity fetishism and alienation (in Marxist terms) and narrow definitions of economic efficiency (in Neoclassical terms). We will lean heavily on theories and case studies of diverse/ community/ solidarity economies as articulated by JK Gibson-Graham, Ethan Miller, and others; other topics will include capitalism (alienation and commodification), Buddhist/ Gandhian economics (which emphasizes local economies, community self-reliance), work (the nature of work, what constitutes good work), resistance/avoidance (James C. Scott), and degrowth. By studying and integrating these ideas as they relate to production, consumption, and social relations, we will also seek to redefine contemporary economics beyond its traditional emphasis on commodity production, restoring ""the social"" to this social science. Evaluation will be based on problem sets, participation and engagement in classroom discussions and field experiences, and a final poster presentation.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced.  Prerequisites: One course in economics or social theory, and permission of instructor.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: 40.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"This course is a general introduction to the biology of lichens, including the unique nature of the lichen symbiosis and the structure, reproduction, chemistry, and ecophysiology of these intriguing organisms.  Particular emphasis is given to field and laboratory methods of identification including field recognition of important genera, micro-habitat preferences of selected species, collection techniques, use of keys, methods of identification, and proper curation.  Major goals of the course are to have students develop the “hands on” skills and the confidence necessary to identify lichens to the species level. The class will meet twice a week, three hours each meeting, with one hour devoted to lecture, two hours to lab. An all-day Saturday field trip is planned at the beginning of the term to introduce students to the diversity of microhabitats in which lichens are found, proper collection techniques, writing brief, accurate field notes, and starting their personal collections. In addition, one or more Saturday morning help sessions will be provided if needed to help students get started on their personal collections. The course grade will be based on: (a) class participation (10%);  (b) demonstrated capacity for doing independent work (20%); (c) bi-weekly quizzes (40%); and (d) a student final project consisting of a properly identified and curated collection of 15 species of lichens, excluding taxa previously identified in class as part of group keying exercises or needing the assistance of the instructor (30%). The final project must include a minimum of seven crustose lichens.  Bonus course credit will be given for any new MDI, county, or state records (5%).

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: none. Class limit: 15. Lab fee: $55."
"One of the deepest human instincts is to tell our life stories, to figure out who we are – the current upheavals here and beyond cry out for our stories just now. This creative writing course will be rooted in an exploration of ourselves, our relationships to others, and our connections to place. We will study the writing process and matters of craft by reading and responding to memoirs by contemporary writers, practical guides to memoir writing, and essays on memoir and memory. Creative work will include online discussions of readings, informal and ungraded writing exercises designed to help with matters of language and technique in your own writing, weekly online peer review of work-in-progress, and the crafting of three life stories. Students will be evaluated on the effort and quality of their writing, commitment to the writing process, participation in online peer review and discussions, production of a chapbook or art piece, and a digital portfolio of their writing. Course material, communication, and online interaction will occur through various means, including Zoom, Google Classroom, Google Docs, email, and individual writing conferences.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: None."
"Over 150 years ago, Henry David Thoreau grappled with the question of how to live a principled and meaningful life in his essay ""Life Without Principle."" This course will revisit this ever-pressing question in our current age. We will examine what it means to live a life with principle, and how to go about living one given the current situation in the world. We will read and discuss foundational and cutting-edge findings of social psychology to better understand how the human mind works and what cognitive quirks lead us to think and behave as we do. We will discuss various aspects of the global situation in 2020, including but not limited to ecological destruction, technology, inequality, power dynamics, and the interactions between these subjects. Throughout, we will engage with the central question of how to define and live a principled life. We will read accounts of various people who have also grappled with this question and discuss their experiences as well as our own.

Students will be evaluated based on their level of engagement with the course material, through class discussions and written reflections. A final project with some element of creativity and freedom will allow them to express their thoughts and ideas at the end of the semester. Since the idea of community is closely related to the course content, and the students and faculty will be living and studying in a unique setting, this course will be an excellent venue to critically engage with the question of how to be a supportive and productive community member. 

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: Permission of instructor; co-enrollment in ES1072 Chemistry and Biology of Food and Drink, and ES2043 Interpreting Maine's Changing Landscape.  Class limit: 8.  Lab fee: None."
"Linear algebra is a foundational area of mathematics, finding widespread application in statistics, machine learning, economics, physics, and across the sciences. The starting point for this course is to consider basic properties of matrices and techniques for solving systems of linear equations. Abstracting and formalizing the process of solving linear equations leads us to the notion of a vector space and related ideas, such as linear independence, dimension, and basis. The course then turns to further properties of matrices and vector spaces, including determinants, eigenvalues and eigenvectors, and linear transformations. As time permits, we will study various applications of linear algebra, such as image compression, dynamical systems (with a focus on ecological applications), Markov chains, and Google's PageRank algorithm. Students who successfully complete this course will gain a solid introduction to the calculational techniques and key constructions and ideas of linear algebra that will prepare them for further work in the sciences and mathematics. Additionally, students will gain experience working at a level of generality and abstraction above that encountered in a typical introductory calculus sequence. Evaluation will be based on weekly problem sets. Students who enroll in this course should have successfully completed a high-school-level algebra class and be motivated to explore a powerful and broadly-used branch of mathematics that for most has a very different feel than the functions-precalculus-calculus sequence. Calculus is not a prerequisite for this class.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: Highschool level algebra class. Class limit: None.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: QR."
"This course explores the basic questions concerning the origins, nature, history, functions and philosophical significances of human languages. Comparisons to other species and to machine languages will also be examined. Readings will include classics texts by Chomsky and others as well selected materials from diverse disciplines such as linguistic anthropology, psychology, ethology, aesthetics, history of languages, and philosophy. Class sessions will include a mix of discussion, lecture, and visiting speakers. Each student will undertake a term-long project examining some topic of interest and examine it from the point of view of the different disciplines and theories covered in the course. Project topics might include, for example: the development of identity, the articulation of gender, forms of representation, the expression of emotion, concepts of rationality, relations between meaning and truth, and communication in an age of artificial intelligences. The goals of the course are: 1) to familiarize students with the range of phenomena associated with language and the principal questions they raise and the theories used to interpret them and 2) to develop skills in researching interdisciplinary questions. Assignments will include two problem sets, a series of weekly homework exercises, and the term project which must be presented both orally and in a major paper due at the end of the term. Evaluation will be based on the extent to which in-class participation and work on the assignments demonstrates substantive progress on the two goals of the course. There are no specific prerequisites, but students will be expected to be able to contribute insights, information and questions from previous work in relevant disciplines and/or studies of languages, undertake challenging readings, and pursue a major independent project. 

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 20.  Lab fee: $20.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"Displacement, disappearance, deportation, exile, and return in New Writing: how do storytellers relate, relive, and re-create displacement from war, emigration, anti-immigration discourses, voluntary or coerced exile, or racial, ethnic, and religious conflicts? What emotional truths do new novels, poems, short stories, and essays reflect—from anger to “otherness” to nostalgia to numbness—when the self and its homeland are separated? Are one or more homelands foundational to identity formation? How do fiction and nonfiction convey refugee experiences and their aftermath? Finally, how are migratory journeys of geography and selfhood accompanied by related trauma, impactful on different generations and changes in the social and political spectrum - and do they evolve as ""a disassembly of the heart and excavation of a new identity"" in recent writing?

Readings include material by twenty-first-century writers from every continent, such as Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie, Claire G. Coleman, Daša Drndic, Isabella Hammad, Cristina Henríquez, Amitav Kumar, Kyun-sook Shin, Valeria Luiselli, Geovani Martins, Imbolo Mbue, Viet Thanh Nguyen, Julie Otsuka, Salman Rushdie, Pajtim Statovci, and Shahla Ujayli.

Students will be assessed on engaged participation, two short papers, one presentation in any medium, and a final essay, story, poem, or play.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"A survey of Anglo-American literature from the Scientific Revolution to the present.  Focuses on the ongoing debate about the role of science in Western culture, the potential benefits and dangers of scientific experimentation, the spiritual, religious, social and political issues that come about with the Ages of Discovery and Reason, and their treatment in literature.  Specific debates include concerns over what is ""natural,"" whether knowledge is dangerous, the perils of objectivity, and the mind/body dichotomy; works include Shelley's Frankenstein, Ibsen's An Enemy of the People, Brecht's Galileo, Lightman's Einstein's Dreams and Naylor's Mama Day as well as short stories and poems.  Writing-focused option.

Level:  Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisite: Writing Seminar I. Offered every two or three years. Lab fee: $10. Class limit: 15. Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"This course is an introduction to literary magazines and the work of editing. We will examine the history of “little” magazines from the mid nineteenth century to the present day. We will investigate the impact of literary magazines on literary culture in America and the world. This class will also be dedicated to surveying the current literary landscape, both print and digital, with special emphasis on BATEAU, the new literary magazine being published at College of the Atlantic. Through the production of BATEAU, the course will offer practical experience in literary publishing: students will gain experience in editing, layout and production, as well as publicizing and promoting the finished product. Students will be expected to respond to course readings on literary magazines and culture as well as keep detailed response notes to submissions to the magazine. Student editors will recommend pieces for publication, rejection and/or further consideration. In addition to editorial duties, students will be expected to complete a midterm and a final project. 

Level: Introductory/Intermediate.  Prerequisites: Writing Seminar, a creative writing or literature class.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: none. Meets the following degree requirements: HS."
"This course seeks to give students knowledge of macroeconomic theories, models, and outcomes. Emphasis will be evenly placed on both formal modeling and intuitive approaches to understanding economic phenomena. An understanding of the relatively formal, abstract macroeconomic models of neoclassical economics will be used to provide a framework for discussion about contemporary macroeconomic phenomena and policy responses. Topics will include unemployment and inflation, fiscal and monetary policy, consumption and savings, monetary theory and banking systems, balance of payments and international macroeconomics, exchange rate determination, financial crises and bubbles, along with topics of student interest. Evaluation will be based on problem sets, a final exam, and classroom participation. 

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisites: one term of college economics, or instructor permission.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: none.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS, QR"
"This practicum will focus on understanding how the Maine Legislature works by participating in the public advocacy process. With the federal government tied up in partisan gridlock, some of the most meaningful climate and energy legislation in recent decades has occurred at the state level. We will examine how bills move through the Legislature from the draft stage to the final version that is voted on by the House and Senate. Students will learn about the ways that the public and professional lobbyists can engage at nearly every stage of the process. Course participants will be introduced to a variety of environmental non-profits, including Sierra Club Maine, Maine Youth for Climate Justice, and the Environmental Priorities Coalition, and learn how they work both independently and collaboratively to advocate for legislation. While this course is Maine-specific, many of the advocacy skills used in public processes may be applicable in other contexts, including municipal, county, and national decision-making. Some of these skills include conducting policy research and analysis, understanding the legislative process, and developing clear written communication. We will read past legislation relating to energy policy, fossil fuel divestment, and tribal sovereignty and discuss why they were successful or not, and whether there were unintended consequences for bills that passed. Students will be required to identify 3 draft bills they find meaningful, draft testimony to present at the public hearing, and work collaboratively with classmates and/or nonprofit organizations to advocate for those issues as they proceed through the legislative process. The course will include at least two weekday field trips to Augusta to attend public hearings and meet with legislators in person.

Evaluation will be based on participation in class discussions, completion of written assignments, engagement with the material and demonstration of working knowledge of the legislative process.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None. Class Limit: 14. Lab Fee: $50. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"In this advanced art practicum and seminar, students will pursue the development of a body of art work or series of art works.  Through practice, critique, discussion, readings, and interactions with artists and those involved in supporting and presenting artists, students will gain a better understanding of art as an ongoing pursuit, beyond classes and assignments.  What does it take to maintain and fertilize the long-term project or a life's work?  How can a creative process be carried on, maintained and sustained?  The primary goal of this course is for each student to develop their art practice, better understand their creative processes, and show evidence of these developments.  This course is an excellent lead-up to a senior project in the arts. Students may work in any medium, but should already have the basic skills required for their chosen project(s)/body of work. This course requires significant dedication outside of class to make artworks. Students are expected to possess and/or extend their ability to be self-directed and motivated. Students will be evaluated on their progress towards their goals, and participation in discussions and critiques; students are encouraged to elect for a credit/no credit grade.

Level: Advanced.  Prerequisites: multiple previous art classes and permission of instructor.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $80.  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS"
"What connects us to the places we inhabit? What sensations, images, and sounds are most striking to us in these spaces? This outdoor, site-specific movement class will ask us to investigate what draws us to place, how we might be inspired by it, and how our bodies interact with the contexts and histories we move through. After convening at a central, outdoor location on the COA campus, we’ll begin each class with a gentle warm up, attuning our senses to different surroundings and deepening our bodily presence. Through scores and games, we’ll hone our skills as improvisers, tracking spaces, following cues, and making choices. Readings, writing and drawing assignments, and short choreography assignments will punctuate the term, culminating in a final class project of our collective design. All in person meetings and choreography assignments will take place outside on campus. Students will be evaluated based on attendance, participation in class discussions, group exercises, and the completion of assigned work. This space is designed for bodies of all abilities and backgrounds. Prior dance experience is welcomed, but not necessary.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class Limit: 15. Lab Fee: None."
"This class will examine the anatomy, physiology, ecology, and evolutionary history of the class Mammalia.  Beginning with the evolutionary origin of the first mammals in the Triassic we will follow the adaptive radiation within the group, and the development of increasingly specialized organisms in response to changing climactic and biological conditions.  During the final portion of the course, we will examine current theories of hominid evolution and the effects of human dispersal patterns on mammalian biodiversity.  Lab work will focus on the identification of North American mammals, but we will also take advantage of other specimens, as they become available.  Evaluation based on a series of quizzes, a lab practical, and a term project focusing on one family of mammals.  Three hours of lecture/discussion per week plus one three hour lab. 

Level: Intermediate/Advanced.  Prerequisites: Permission of Instructor. Biology I & II required, additional courses in ecology and evolution strongly encouraged. Class Limit: None. Lab Fee $50.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES"
"This course will examine how members of Maine’s remote coastal and islands communities live in relationship to the ocean. Their connection to the nearby and distant waters is defined by everyday uses such as fishing, lobstering, and wrinkle harvesting as well as deeper historical relationships rooted in many generations of people doing everything from sailing schooners around the world to harvesting shellfish in the same cove over centuries. This class will teach students how to use multi-disciplinary research methodologies to document, map, and analyze both contemporary and historical uses of the ocean. Using coastal and island communities as sites for collaborative community-based research the class will contribute to wider discussions about a process known as Ocean Planning that seeks to create processes to plan how communities, stakeholders, industry and the government build a long term vision of how the spaces of the Gulf of Maine might be used. Students will work in teams to produce a geo-referenced story about a particular place in the ocean off the coast of Maine that has meaning and an emotional connection to a community told in an interesting and compelling way. This information will help give island communities a stronger voice in ocean policy and in decision making processes for siting large scale projects in the nearby ocean environment. The class will draw on methodologies developed around North America to document the everyday uses and interactions people have with the local environment using oral historical and biographical mapping to provide a sort of snapshot of current uses as well as soliciting histories of how those patterns have changed over time. The class will include a substantial fieldwork and field trip component that will require additional times outside of the class schedule. Students will be evaluated on class participation, active engagement in field research settings, short assignments as well as a final project. The class is appropriate for students with a range of backgrounds, however, experience with historical or community-based research or GIS mapping would be helpful. 

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisites: Preference will be given to students who have previous community-based research experience or other academic background directly relevant to the course. Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: $150.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"This is a broad course, covering the biology of organisms in various marine habitats (rocky intertidal, mud and sand, estuaries, open ocean, coral reefs, deep sea), and some policy and marine management and conservation issues. The largest part of this course is focused on learning to identify and understand the natural history and ecology of the marine flora and fauna of New England, with an emphasis on the rocky intertidal of Mount Desert Island.  The course meets twice per week with one afternoon for laboratory work or field trips.  Evaluations are based on the quality of participation in class, one in-class practical, several sets of essay questions, and a field notebook emphasizing natural history notes of local organisms.  This class is intended for first year students, who will have priority during registration.  Returning students may take this course only with permission of the instructor.   

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites:  Signature of instructor for returning students.  Offered at least every other year.  Class limit:  20.  Lab fee:  $80.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES"
"This course focuses on current and classical research in marine ecology worldwide, with a strong focus on understanding the primary literature, and then conducting field studies that apply these ideas to current questions in Maine intertidal marine ecology. The first half of the term we will be reading and discussing both primary literature and review papers covering the ecology and evolution of marine organisms. Students will read papers, provide short written responses before class, and have two small synthetic problem sets or essays over this portion of the term. The second half of the term students will divide their time between a large class project and small-group projects, with projects largely based in the local intertidal community. Much of this fieldwork will be tide-dependent and occur outside of the listed classroom time. Projects may include the population biology and ecology of introduced species, intraspecific variation in morphology and behavior, using eDNA or individual barcoding to help determine local species composition, and estimates of biodiversity in local habitats. Students will also take part in an applied class project aimed at assisting with the management and monitoring of locally co-managed species, clams and alewives.

Level: Advanced.  Prerequisites: One class in marine biology and at least two additional courses in ecology, evolution, or statistics and research design, and permission of instructor. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: $50.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES"
"This course provides an introduction to the biology and natural history of marine mammals, specializing in species resident within the North Atlantic.  Topics covered include: phylogeny and taxonomy; anatomy and physiology; behavior; sensory ecology; and management/conservation issues.  The course includes field trips to observe animals in their natural habitat, dissection of specimens, and exposure to the professional peer review field. Students are expected to complete two individual literature-based reviews, one species- and one system-based, to be presented in class.  Assessment is based on class participation, presentations as well as written submissions. Lab fee covers costs of field trips, including potential boat and field station time, and optional travel to a regional conference during the term.  Offered every other year.

Level:  Introductory/Intermediate.  Prerequisite: Biology: Form and Function, Biology: Cellular Processes of Life, and a writing-focused class or permission of instructor. Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $200.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES"
"This Fall course provides an introduction to the biology and natural history of marine mammals, specializing in species resident within the North Atlantic, in a field setting.  Students spend two weeks prior to the start of the fall term at the College's Mt. Desert Rock Marine Research Station. In addition to introductory topics in marine mammal biology that include phylogeny and taxonomy; anatomy and physiology; behavior; sensory ecology; and management/conservation issues, students also integrate themselves into the resident research team and work on team projects that will include observation of animals in their natural habitat. In the Fall, students meet 3-4 further times for dissection of specimens, team project presentations, and optional attendance at a regional conference. Assessment is based on two individual literature-based reviews, one species- and one system-based, to be presented in class, participation in research projects, and written submissions of their research. Lab fee covers costs of field trips, including boat and field station time, and conference costs. A $250 nonrefundable deposit is required by June 1.  Offered every other year.

Level:  Intermediate.  Prerequisite: Biology I, II and a writing-focused class or permission of instructor.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: $600.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES"
"Primarily practical course introducing students to the fundamental concepts of physiology in marine mammals and an overview of what health, threats and disease processes mean in the context of marine mammals. The course includes a general description of the key physiological systems, and the most common diseases and health threats to marine mammals as well as the role of marine mammal health in changing ocean ecosystems. Practical classes include an introduction to the incident command structure, marine mammal necropsy technique, sample collection and the role of necropsy investigation in marine mammal research and stranding response. These dissection classes also provide the material to review the link between structure and function in anatomy and physiology in the marine mammal context. Students will be evaluated on the basis of their contribution to group discussions, a student presentation project and a term paper.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: Biology I, II, Marine Mammal Biology and permission of the instructor. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: 75."
"Where is the largest population of humpback whales in the world, the largest caribou herd in North America, the only confirmed Viking settlement in North America, and Paleozoic water bottled for consumption? The remote Canadian province of Newfoundland and Labrador presents a stunning landscape, an astoundingly rich ecological setting, and a tragic history of poverty amidst an incredible natural resource, the northern cod fishery, that was ultimately destroyed. The province has been alternately invaded or occupied by different groups of Native Americans along with Norseman, Basques, French, British, and the U.S. military, because of its strategic location and rich fishing and hunting grounds. One of the first and one of the last British colonies, this richest of fisheries produced a very class based society, composed of a wealthy few urban merchants and an highly exploited population of fishing families often living on the edge of survival. But within the past 50 years, Newfoundland society has been forced to evolve. The provincial government looks towards oil and mineral exploitation to turn around the economy, while ex-fishermen consider eco- and cultural tourism with growing ambivalence. This then is our setting, and background, for an intense examination of the human ecology of this province; the relationship between humans and their environment, sometimes successful, sometimes otherwise, the struggle between the tenuous grasp of civilization and this marvelous, terrible place. To do this we will discuss various readings, examine case studies and review the natural and human history of this unique province.  Our learning will culminate with a two-week trip to Newfoundland to examine its issues firsthand.  Evaluation will be based on class and field trip participation, responses to reading questions, a field journal, and a final project.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate.  Prerequisites: Permission of Instructor.  Lab fee: $850.  Class limit: 15.  Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"This course is an introduction to the work of Karl Marx and to some of the ways his work has been taken up across a range of disciplines, interdisciplinary fields, and political projects. We will pay particular attention to his thinking about the relation between theory and praxis, and to his notions of capital, value, money, commodity, labour, ideology, alienation, internationalism and class struggle. In addition to reading Marx’s own writings, we will also read work in postcolonial studies, feminist theory, cultural anthropology, racial capitalism, Black Studies and philosophy that engages with Marx’s thinking. In addition to Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, authors will likely include Louis Althusser, Charisse Burden-Stelly, Frantz Fanon, Silvia Federici, Antonio Gramsci, David Harvey, C.L.R. James, Ranjana Khanna, Rosa Luxemburg, Catherine MacKinnon, Adam Smith, and Gayatri Spivak. We will examine the implications of Marxist analyses for questions of political and structural change, critiques of capitalism and analyses of its relation to racialised and gendered dynamics of power. In addition to academic texts, course materials will draw on films, news publications, and contemporary examples of political-economic challenges. Students will be evaluated based on class participation, weekly reading responses, collaborative small group and individual projects.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS."
"This intermediate/advanced writing workshop will focus on the capaciousness and possibilities of the memoir genre and is designed for students who have a keen interest in writing short-form memoir (memoir fragments); have a working familiarity with the elements of narrative; are eager to read and write for discovery and growth; are interested in experimenting with a variety of forms; and who are seeking to join a community of writers in a workshop setting. Close attention to matters of craft, form, and the writing process will be the province of this workshop course. Mary Karr’s The Art of Memoir and other essays on craft will serve as guides to the writing and revising of a memoir piece (2-3 linked pieces or 1 longer piece, totaling 15-20 pages). Workshops and craft exercises will be the central focus of our class sessions. Active and engaged reading, writing, and peer review will be the focus of work outside of class. We will read three memoirs as models of various forms and possibilities within the memoir genre, such as: Terry Tempest Williams’ Refuge: An Unnatural History of Family and Place (interweaving narratives); Jhumpa Lahiri’s In Other Words (translingual); and Patti Smith’s Woolgathering (prose poems and photographs), or others. Students will select to independently read a fourth memoir that bends or blends genres. Class sessions will be centered on student-led workshops, craft exercises, and reflections on writing and revision. Creative work outside of class will include daily writing, weekly peer review, and the crafting of memoir work through multiple drafts. Peer review and individual writing conferences with the instructor will provide an opportunity for students to engage in focused conversations about their work outside of class. Students will be evaluated on their commitment, engagement, and growth; their participation in workshop and peer review; the production of a chapbook or art project of their work; and a final portfolio of their writing.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $20. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"This course not only gives students knowledge and understanding of rhetorical theory and practice so they can work effectively with developing writers, but also provides them with a review of grammar, methods of evaluating writing, and strategies for teaching exposition, argument, and persuasion.  Students put this knowledge to practical use by working as peer tutors in the Writing Center.  Students participate in this course for one academic year and receive one credit.  In addition to Williams' Style: Ten Lessons in Clarity and Grace and Irmscher's Teaching Expository Writing, students read numerous articles from College Composition and Communication, College English, The Writing Instructor, Language Arts, and English Journal, and Research in the Teaching of English as well as a text dealing with teaching writing in their specialty, e.g. Writing Themes about Literature or a Short Guide to Writing about Biology.

Level:  Advanced.  Prerequisites: Working knowledge of grammar and usage, excellent writing skills, ability to work closely with people, and signature of faculty member in writing or education.  Class limit: 15.  Meets the following degree requirements: ED, W"
"The roles and responsibilities of a writing tutor are evershifting. As writing studies scholar Toni-Lee Capossela tells us, a tutor will at various times be “a reader, a respondent, a questioner, a critic, a listener, a friend, a colleague, a collaborator, or a guide.” By presenting a range of writing center theories and research, this course will give students theoretical knowledge and practical tutoring strategies that will enable them to make informed choices when working with developing writers across different disciplines and conventions. Topics include negotiating the priorities of a tutoring session, differentiating between and responding to the needs of global and small-scale revision, motivational scaffolding, and understanding the often recursive nature of the writing process. Additionally, students will be exposed to active learning strategies and concepts such as cognitive load theory, the zone of proximal development, embodied cognition, and the affective domain. In the first part of the term, students will put their practical and theoretical knowledge into use by conducting one-on-one tutoring sessions with their classmates. During the second half of the term, students will collaborate with experienced tutors, and by week 8 they will begin to tutor on their own. Students will write two major essays–the first a literacy narrative, the second an expository essay on a writing center topic of their choosing.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced.  Prerequisites: Students need to have a commitment to writing and a demonstrated ability to write successfully for college classes. They don’t need to have previously taken a writing program-approved writing course, though.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: W."
"The roles and responsibilities of a writing tutor are evershifting. As writing studies scholar Toni-Lee Capossela tells us, a tutor will at various times be “a reader, a respondent, a questioner, a critic, a listener, a friend, a colleague, a collaborator, or a guide.” By presenting a range of writing center theories and research, this course will give students theoretical knowledge and practical tutoring strategies that will enable them to make informed choices when working with developing writers across different disciplines and conventions. Topics include negotiating the priorities of a tutoring session, differentiating between and responding to the needs of global and small-scale revision, motivational scaffolding, and understanding the often recursive nature of the writing process. In the first part of the term, students will put their practical and theoretical knowledge into use by conducting one-on-one tutoring sessions with their classmates. During the second half of the term, students will collaborate with experienced tutors, and by week 8 they will begin to tutor independently.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced.  Prerequisites: Students need to have a commitment to writing and a demonstrated ability to write successfully for college classes. They don’t need to have previously taken a writing program-approved writing course, though.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"What is the best way to insure that communities can provide dependable, well-paying jobs to their citizens? Why does Coca Cola spend millions of dollars to advertise a product with which most people are already very familiar? What can the game of blackjack tell us about how industries are structured? How can we get coal-burning power utilities to reduce their carbon emissions while they save millions of dollars in the process? How can we provide much better health care to all Americans, at much less cost, while making it easier for small businesses to grow? All of these questions, and many more like them, are answered by microeconomic theory. This intermediate-level course exposes students to basic microeconomic theories, models, and concepts that shed insight on the economic behavior of businesses, individuals, governments and politicians, and international organizations. We will emphasize approaches that have numerous overlapping applications to both business and policy evaluation: markets, pricing, firm structure and decision-making, strategic behavior (using game theory), consumer behavior, externalities (such as greenhouse gas emissions) and the provision of public goods (such as military, education, and environmental conservation). We will pay special attention to the economics of asymmetrical information (adverse selection, moral hazard, and principal-agent situations) that have a wide range of applications, including issues such as the ineffectiveness of the American health care system, the structuring of business finance, and the hiring and paying of employees. This will be a non-calculus course, but will give students exposure to technical economic modeling, with heavy emphasis on graphical modeling of complex social phenomena.  We will use a lab period to conduct extensive experiments and games that illustrate or test economic concepts and hypotheses.

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisite: Signature of instructor or one course in economics or business.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS, QR"
"“Only by unleashing the fictionality of fiction, the imaginativeness of the imagination, the dream songs of our dreams, can we hope to approach the new, and to create fiction that may, once again, be more interesting than the facts."" -Salman Rushdie, “Ask Yourself"".  Nobody exemplifies these notions better than Rushdie himself. Therefore, this course will be an exploration of the fantastical world of Salman Rushdie through his seminal novel Midnight’s Children. Deemed as one of the Great Books of the 20th century, which won the Booker prize the year of its publication, 1981, and the Booker of Bookers twice over (in 1993 and 2008), the novel is a prime example of postcolonialism with a magical realist twist.
In this class, we will take a deep dive into Rushdie’s novel by paying close attention to the prose and his style and the history and contexts that he sets up in this novel. Therefore, the reading of the novel will be supplemented with historical background and literary criticism that bring up questions of utopia, nation, politics, identity, and subalternity, to name a few. You will be evaluated on class participation and written assignments like discussion posts, an oral presentation, a paper, and a final project.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"For tens of thousands of years, contemplative practices among many Aboriginal, First Nations, and indigenous peoples have connected humans with life in all its forms, including ancestors, country or land, and community. Enlightenment and embodied understanding of the nature of mind result from Buddhist teachings and practices as they have traveled from South Asia to East and Southeast Asia to the rest of the world, turning us away from attachment to material comforts and privileges and toward experiential inquiry into human experiences of suffering and flourishing. Contemplative practices, including mindfulness meditation, qigong, taiji, and yoga, have been the subject of recent decades of research into their impacts on wellbeing and compassion. Studies in cognitive and affective neuroscience, cognitive and developmental psychology, integrative medicine, comparative religion, education, and sustainability science examine the impacts of contemplative practices on mental and physical health, socio-emotional learning, and a less consumption-driven future. The application of these practices has similarly flourished in mindfulness-based interventions and programs in therapeutic settings and schooling from early childhood to adult education and professional programs including counseling, law, medicine, social work, and teacher education. Pedagogical approaches apply to classroom contexts as well as informal settings such as environmental education and include diverse approaches such as collaborative poetry and contemplative photography. This course introduces students to practices that span hundreds of generations and diverse faith traditions and the ethics, epistemology, and psychology underlying them; recent studies that aim to understand their efficacy, underlying mechanisms, and methods of inquiry, and educational models and practices for offering these approaches. Students will learn through engagement with and micro-phenomenological inquiry of contemplative practices—including two weekend retreats, reading of recent empirical research, and educational application in the context and at the level based on student interest. Summative assessments include a synthesis of a practice-based micro-phenomenological journal, a blog synthesizing relevant empirical research for a student-chosen audience, and the design and/or facilitation of a contemplative educational experience focused on a practice of interest and for a student-chosen audience.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: $30.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS, ED."
"This course will focus on creating sculptural objects through the use of mixed media. This course is designed to build off of three dimensional design and continue exploring various materials and processes as they relate to sculpture. Through this course students will be introduced to a range of materials and processes addressing their use ranging from aesthetic to conceptual considerations. This may include additive, subtractive, found object, mold making and casting, as well as other traditional and alternative processes as the opportunity presents itself.
 
This is a studio/classroom based course that will introduce materials and methods, provide demonstrations, require research, discuss concepts planning and construction, address safe material handling and tool usage when applicable, as well as provide the opportunity to experiment and play. Students will create projects based off of their own designs that push them both technically and conceptually. Student evaluations will be based upon on completion of projects and related research, class participation in demonstrations and class discussions, as well as project based critiques. 

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: Students taking this class should have previously completed an introductory course in ceramics, sculpture, or 3D design, or have equivalent professional experience. Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $120.  Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"Challenging conventions governing what constitutes wilderness and/or landscape and how artists have shaped our perception of these are among the topics which we will consider. Landscapes contain life that seems to fluctuate between haggard or feral states of nature. We will investigate how some artists create distinctions between that which is cultivated and that which is ‘natural’; what images evoke nostalgia for a lost past; suggest the preference for a human dominance over those origins we have isolated ourselves from; and, other emergent, more radical topics. Although we look at ecologies through the eyes of artists, students interested in the science, history, and literature are encouraged to take the course. This course is concerned with the visualization of what is in the landscape. There will be an observational drawing module within the course. The majority of the course will center around visual material curated and presented to you on-line. Course readings will engage with a variety of texts written by artists, art historians, geographers, historians, writers, and cultural theorists that address the invention of the modern idea of wilderness and landscape – and these will be set in context with works that engage with the visual and phenomenological reception of the artist’s mind. Viewed as a regular practice, the descriptive power of drawing can intensify the experience of observational fieldwork, provide the draughtsperson with a richer understanding of the cycles within a landscape, and deepen our relationship with the natural world. We will seek to learn and understand the strategies of others through reading, study, and at-home studio practice.

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: none.  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS, HY"
"This workshop teaches students how to apply and use a variety of molecular genetic and cellular laboratory techniques at Mount Desert Island Biological Laboratory.  Students learn how to do basic molecular genetic techniques, including some subset of DNA extraction, RNA extraction, PCR, RT-PCR, cloning, and bioinformatics. Students work on how to carry out a research design around a specific question, how to carry out the research and interpret results. The material will be taught around a research question that the group will work on for a one-week period over spring break.  The course is taught by various MDIBL research staff. Successful completion of the workshop requires attendance for the entire week.  

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisites:  One class in cellular and molecular biology (Biology: Cellular Processes of Life counts) or genetics, and permission of instructors.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: none. Meets the following degree requirements: none."
"This course is an introduction to a wide variety of physical skills useful for anyone interested in investigating their own potential for physical research and self-expression. Techniques are derived from movement training methodologies developed for actors as well as other practices including (but not limited to) classical ballet, martial arts, circus skills, sports training, acrobatics, and improvisation. Students gain a greater sense of physical awareness and imaginative possibility, building strength, mental and physical agility, stamina and flexibility while grappling with questions regarding personal and collective responsibility, personal and collective consent and the power/politics of a specific body in a given space or circumstance. The class works to challenge preconceptions about body image and body language while working creatively and collaboratively to clarify abstract concepts through physical action. Evaluation is based on class participation (including labs/screenings and small group rehearsals), engagement with the course blog (including all introduced topics and concepts), and successful completion and presentation of a short sequence of assigned projects. Students with any or no movement experience are welcome. 

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 11. Lab fee: $50. Default grading option: Credit/No Credit. Meets the following degree requirements: ADS."
"Multimedia Crossings: Intersections in Painting, Performance and Installation Art: Kader Attia, William Pope L., Yinka Shonibare, Ghada Amer, Friedensreich Hundertwasser, Wangechi Mutu, Anish Kapoor, Helen Mirra, El Anatsui, Eva Hesse. Since the 1960s, the variety of an increasing choice of media has created more diverse working fields for artists. While this may make it easier for more artists to find areas of expression, it may also be more difficult for students to map their own artistic language. This course is designed for students who are starting to develop their own personality as artists. Experimenting with materials, techniques, and styles, on the basis of collective readings and written personal statements, will be central to this class. Multimedia Crossings is a maker’s course with a theory component. Readings, assigned slide-presentations and class discussions will be informed by the work of non-western contemporary artists. Students will be expected to complete assigned studio-art projects as well as independent art projects outside of class time and to write and present one seminar paper. Student evaluation will be based on timely submission of coursework, attendance, and active participation in class discussions and critiques.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Class Limit: 12. Prerequisites: Two previous courses within AD resource area and permission of instructor. This should not be your first college level, studio art course. Lab Fee: $40. Meets the following degree requirements: ADS"
"This course will examine the theory and practice of museum education. The concepts will be relevant to all types of museums and informal learning environments, as well as to students interested in applying the ideas in school environments. As we investigate learning in museums, we will consider some of the major debates in the field, and develop our personal educational philosophies. We will base our classwork on the widely read Learning from Museums (Falk & Dierking), and we will consider links to educational philosophers including Dewey, Piaget, and Vygotsky, as well as museum research and evaluation studies. We will also examine a number of current issues in the field including family learning, the role of interactivity, issues of authority, voice and representation, and the potential of emerging technologies including remote learning, asynchronous interpretation, and Augmented Reality. Simultaneously, we will apply this theory to a practical project: helping to inform the early stage planning of a future museum project. For this project, we will conduct background educational research and a front-end evaluation study. Based on the results we will start to envision possible interpretive approaches consistent with our developing educational philosophy and our understanding of the potential visitors. The course will stress the use of the design process: integrating iterative prototyping and evaluation to ensure we are developing approaches that will be engaging and meaningful.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class Limit: 15. Lab fee: None."
"This course offers students the opportunity to participate in the authorship, design and fabrication of interpretive projects in COA’s George B Dorr Museum.Typically coursework surrounds the creation of educational environments, activities and events that showcase concepts and content on changing special topics. Areas of content explored in projects range between art, science and natural history. With guidance, students in the tutorial will engage in researching content, developing interpretive projects, writing textual elements, and designing and fabricating installations, events and activities in the museum. The class will act as a team and collaborate to develop and produce material.

Evaluation will be based on (dependent on specific tasks that include research, writing, and fabrication): attention to detail, quality of craft, effective collaboration in an iterative group process and the timely completion of work The success of this group project is dependent upon a high level of scholarship and crafting of exhibit areas toward an end-of-term completion date for the realization of project elements. This course is appropriate for students interested in education, design and communication. 

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisite: Permission of instructor. Curiosity and Wonder is strongly recommended; Graphic Design, Communicating Science and/or Education courses are also suitable previous coursework. Class limit: 10.  Lab fee: none."
"As newly independent African nations claimed their freedom from colonial rule, an effort was underway to define the sound of these nations. State-sponsored bands likes Bembeya Jazz and Balla et ses Balladins in Guinea developed a sound that announced Guinea as a modern nation. Their music drew heavily from the sounds of Cuban son, entering the newly independent nation into an African diasporic discourse that signaled alliances with international Marxist movements. In 1977 Fela Kuti released the track “Colonial Mentality,” a song that forcefully argued that even seventeen years into Nigeria’s independence from colonial rule, euro-centric mindsets continued to haunt Nigerian politics. That same year, Kalakuta, Kuti’s autonomous communal compound was burned to the ground after an assault by Nigerian soldiers. In 1987, Hugh Masekela released the track “Bring Him Back Home (Nelson Mandela)” on his album Tomorrow. The song caught fire as an anthem of the anti-apartheid movement that would see the political prisoner Mandela freed in 1990 and inaugurated as President in 1994. This practice-based music course will sharpen students’ music performance skills as they engage in the critical study of popular music from the era of African independence. Students will work to perform a musical repertoire drawn from this time period, including the artists listed above as well as Miriam Makeba, Franco Luambo, E.T. Mensah, The Rail Band, OK Jazz, Manu Dibango, and more. In addition to rehearsing and performing a selection of songs, students will engage with reading, listening, and viewing that informs a historical understanding of how music became a venue for contesting visions for post-colonial Africa. In addition to the practice-based research involved in learning a musical repertoire, students will undertake a research project examining the life of an artist who helped shape the sound of post-colonial Africa (sounds that often resonated out into the diaspora). The course will take place in two lab sessions each week, one of which will be dedicated to rehearsal, and one that will be split between rehearsal and academic study/analysis. There will also be an evening session reserved for film screenings and independent rehearsal time. Participants will be assessed based on attendance and participation in class, individual practice and preparedness, the research project, and map quizzes on the African continent. This Intermediate/Advanced ensemble course is open to students who play an instrument or sing. To achieve a workable balance of instruments, the course will be by permission of instructor. Students wishing to take the course should email a brief statement to the instructor describing their musical practice and what they hope to get out of the course. This class will be graded pass/fail by default, but students may also choose to take the course for a letter grade if they wish. 

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: This Intermediate/Advanced ensemble course is open to students who play an instrument or sing. To achieve a workable balance of instruments, the course will be by permission of instructor. Students wishing to take the course should email a brief statement to the instructor describing their musical practice and what they hope to get out of the course. This class will be graded credit/no credit by default, but students may also choose to take the course for a letter grade if they wish. Class limit: 10. Lab fee: $35. Meets the following degree requirements: ADS."
"This hands-on course deals with the aural, mental, and physical elements of music and its production.  It is divided into instructional segments including:  Ear Training and Aural Perception, Music Theory, Basic Keyboard Skills, Arranging and Composition, and Basic Guitar Skills. This course is open to all students, regardless of musical experience.  The sole prerequisite is a desire to make music or simply to enrich one's skills as a critical listener of music.  Efforts are made to accommodate the special needs of the musical novice, as well as to challenge the experienced performer.  Emphasis is on popular song styles, but analysis of Western Art Music forms are included for comparison purposes.

Level:  Introductory.  Prerequisites: none.  Class limit: 12. Lab fee $35. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"India, Bangladesh, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka are home to over one billion people and a huge diversity of musical traditions. This course will explore the musical, social, cultural, religious, political, and historical dimensions of a range of styles from South Asia, including: Hindustani and Carnatic classical music; folk styles; Hindu, Sikh, and Muslim religious music; film music; and music of the South Asian diaspora. Assessment of student work will include participation in class discussions, weekly critical listening / analysis logs, a research paper on the cultural context of a chosen South Asian musical style, and a final presentation analyzing a chosen piece of South Asian music.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None. Class Limit: 15. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"Ready to take an existing or budding musical practice to the next level? This course is for students interested in developing their skills as instrumentalists, vocalists, composers, songwriters, or beatmakers. Students will work independently (or in small groups) to create and implement a learning plan that reflects their specific musical goals. Students are welcome to sign up individually or in groups (e.g., a string quartet, a songwriting partnership, or a band would be welcome to sign up together).

Class topics will include practice strategies, repertoire selection, rehearsal techniques, performance skills, notating/communicating musical intentions, applications of theory, and interdisciplinary connections (i.e. dance and visual arts). Practice outside of class is expected and will be documented through a reflective practice log. A final project will be determined in consultation with the professor. At the term’s close, students will share a representation of their learning and complete a self-assessment reflecting on their progress.

Level: Variable, Introductory through Advanced. Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 12.  Lab Fee: $40. Meets the following degree requirements: ADS"
"This course will be a fast and broad exploration of the presentation of Native American identities and communities through performance. We will study a series of representations of indigeneity through embodied performance on stage and in public spaces. Our analytical frameworks will be dramatic theory, performance studies, and native theatre studies. This course will better equip students to understand how manipulating the image of the “Indian” through performance contributes to, resists, and complicates colonial erasure and the settler logic. The geographic scope of the course is focused on Native American communities within the United States, but we will occasionally draw from artists based in other territories. Key questions we will engage with are: by what means have Native American communities been represented and performed in U.S. history? What does it mean to represent ourselves and others? What circumstances do artists, activists, and scholars need to consider when making and analyzing performance in the aftermath of colonialism? What are the ties between artistic self-representation by Native and Indigenous peoples and larger political movements towards self-determination? What might the study of U.S. Native American drama enrich our understanding of contemporary American society? Artists and artworks studied may include: Spiderwoman Theater’s Sun, Moon and Feather, Reverb -ber-ber-ations; Muriel Miguel’s (Kuna Rappahannock)’s Hot’n’Soft; Mary Kathryn Nagle’s (Cherokee) Manahatta; Larissa FastHorse’s (Sicangu-Lakota) What Would Crazy Horse Do, The Thanksgiving Play; Kent Monkman / Miss Chief Eagle Testickle’s (Cree) Casualties of Modernity, Taxonomies of the European Male, Another Feather in Her Bonnet; Hanay Geiogamah’s (Kiowa-Delaware) Body Indian, Land Sale; Lynn Riggs’ (Cherokee) Green Grow the Lilacs, The Cherokee Night; Coco Fusco and Guillermo Gomez-Peña’s Couple in The Cage: Two Undiscovered Amerindians Visit the West; Marie Clements’s Burning Vision; Molly Spotted Elk (Penobscot); Ty DeFoe (Ojibwe and Oneida); Maria Thereza Alves, Groundwater Arts, Branden Jacobs-Jenkins’ An Octoroon, Les Freres Corbusier’s Bloody Bloody Andrew Jackson, Suzan Lori-Parks’ Venus, Double Edge Theater’s Ohkehteau Assessment will include written or otherwise documented script and performance analysis, a photo-collage mid-term project, and a final project of the student’s choice. The course will be conducted in English, but students will have the option to complete written coursework in Spanish after consultation with the instructor.

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: Previous coursework in Native American Studies and at least one prior course in literature, theatre, or visual arts is recommended. Class Limit: 15. Lab fee: $65."
"From first contact through the confrontation surrounding the Standing Rock Sioux Tribe and the Dakota Access Pipeline, Native American law has tried to reconcile two incommensurate legal systems and widely varying government policies.  This course examines the evolution of federal Native American or ""Indian"" Law from colonization onward as impacted by treaties, executive orders, congressional enactments, and major U.S. Supreme Court cases interpreting the U.S. Constitution and statutes as they involve Native American legal issues. This is not a class about tribal law or the indigenous legal systems that exist among the various tribes in the US.  Rather, it examines the legal system imposed on tribes from the outside; a system that has evolved over time and creates the legal framework which tribes operate under today. Students will gain an understanding of law as a policy tool and framework, and acquire the necessary skills to work on policy issues affecting native peoples.  We will focus on primary legal material as well as secondary interpretations of that material.  There will be some comparative law analysis from other countries and an examination of how the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples relates to US practices.  Students will complete several analytical problem sets that require an application of course concepts to fact scenarios as well as a major paper on a legal topic of their choosing.  A class visit to a Maine reservation will allow conversation with tribal leaders involved with current environmental and Native American issues in Maine.  

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisites: None beyond proficiency in college-level reading, writing, critical thinking, and research skills; however, Indigenous America is strongly recommended. Class limit: 20.  Lab fee: $35.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"This course is a challenging introduction to several centuries of Native American literature, the relevance of historical and cultural facts to its literary forms,  and the challenges of bridging oral and written traditions.  Authors include such writers as Silko, Erdrich, Harjo, Vizenor, and McNickle as well as earlier speeches and short stories.  We also consider non-native readings and appropriation of Native American styles, material and world views. 

Level: Intermediate.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: none.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"According to COA’s website, Human Ecology studies the relationships between humans and their natural and social environments. But what do we mean by “nature,” and what distinguishes a natural environment from a social one? Moreover, what kinds of relationships should we cultivate with our natural environments? This discussion-based course explores the concepts of nature and environmental responsibility across different philosophical and cultural frameworks. We will draw on a variety of readings from environmental ethics, ecofeminism, deep ecology, American transcendentalism, indigenous studies, queer theory, and Buddhism. We will read selections from thinkers such as John Stuart Mill, Ralph Waldo Emerson, Ramachandra Guha, Aldo Leopold, Arne Naess, Val Plumwood, Vandana Shiva, Gary Snyder, Henry David Thoreau, Eduardo Kohn, Mary-Jane Rubenstein, Thich Nhat Hanh, Anna Tsing, and others. 

Guiding questions include the following: What is nature? How is the idea of nature politicized and socially constructed? Do we have moral obligations to nature? How should humans relate to nature? What assumptions drive the conceptual distinction between humans and nature? Although this course will focus primarily on theoretical questions, we will also discuss issues in applied ethics such as, control over natural resources, wilderness preservation, sustainability, and consumption. Throughout the course, we will revisit questions pertaining to environmental activism, and we will consider how philosophy can help us to articulate our ethical responsibilities and obligations. 

Upon completion of this course, students will have gained a richer philosophical understanding of the idea of nature and they will be familiar with key debates in environmental ethics. Course requirements include weekly writing assignments, a midterm exam, a final paper, and class participation. There are no prerequisites, but students should arrive to this class prepared to engage difficult philosophical texts and to share their ideas with others. 

Level: Introductory/Intermediate.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: $10.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"This three-credit interdisciplinary course will explore how coastal communities, especially around Frenchman Bay, have navigated and are navigating major changes in their communities, the Bay, and the ecology around them.  This place-based course will use the Bay and surrounding towns to explore how history, geography, audio storytelling, and data science can illuminate, document and nurture community perspectives on their past, present and future. Students will undertake research projects focused on communities and their stories of  adaptation and community members’ reflections on the dramatic changes they have witnessed in the last decades both onshore and at sea.  The class will provide opportunities to learn about and use skills from data analysis and visualization, oral history and audio story-telling as well as community-based research rooted in both history and geography.  This interdisciplinary approach will allow the class to grapple with how projects can be used to help facilitate community conversations about how their inhabitants have used different strategies to adapt in the past and present in ways that could inform their future.  The course will involve field trips, overnight stays, and community work throughout the region, and the monster course format provides extended periods of time on the projects they undertake.  The course will include time on the water and in communities, and students should expect to spend substantial time on and off campus for the class.  Students will be evaluated on short assignments, team projects, and overall level of effort on coursework.  This course is appropriate for students from a wide range of backgrounds and both academic and personal experiences, and there are no prerequisites.  Given the immersive approach of the class the instructors would encourage students to reach out to the instructors prior to the class.

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisite: None. Class limit: 10. Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS, HY, QR."
"Historically a sewing sampler consisted of examples of an individual’s handwork; it served as a learning tool and a library of stitches, signs and symbols. Needlework also visualizes individual and shared culture, defines and develops community, and sometimes is an act of subversive and overt revolution. This course is a sampler of the ways sewing, in home and industry, is gendered and drives economies. Throughout this course, we will investigate topics like the Triangle Shirt Fire, subsequent labor regulations, the mending movement, fast fashion, environmental impact, and sewing as a means of provocation and ritual. Artists such as Sonya Clark, Nick Cave, Ruth Asawa, Bisa Butler, Do Ho Suh, Sheila Hicks, and projects like Social Justice Sewing Academy will be topics of discussion. Students will make weekly individual stitched projects, and design and contribute to a collective project. Depending on the term, the course may also include off-campus field trips and guest appearances from visiting artists. This class is introductory and open to all students irrespective of their background in sewing, needlework, or related topics. All coursework can be done with simple needle and thread. Evaluation will be based on short response papers to readings/presentations, stitched projects, a presentation on individual research (the form of this is open), participation in class discussions and a final project. 

Level: Introductory. Pre-requisites: None. Class Limit: 12. Lab Fee: $15."
"This course studies the American novel as written by women of the nineteenth century. It focuses on how women's issues and styles change over the course of the century, with its revolutionary economic, technological, social and political shifts, as well as on enduring questions.   As we read from among the wide selection of nineteenth-century American women novelists (who outnumbered and outsold male authors)  -- such as Rowson, Foster, Child, Cooke, Fern, Stowe, Phelps, Jewett, Chopin, and Gilman -- we consider how they have shaped the tradition of the novel and social values Americans encounter today. 

Level: Introductory/Intermediate.  Prerequisites:  Writing Seminar I or signature of the instructor.  Offered every other year. Class limit 15. Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"Affiliate program with the National Outdoor Leadership School (NOLS) for domestic programs (NOLS fee required).  Field studies and practice of wilderness expedition skills, leadership, group dynamics, safety, judgment and environmental studies.  Credit value depends on the length of the NOLS course and can range from a minimum of two weeks to a full semester program (variable up to 4.8 credits)."
"The purpose of this group study is to deepen our understanding of winter camping through investigating local ecology and natural history in our expedition environment. We will push our experience and knowledge of winter camping and traditional skills through four major topics of interest: Food, Gear, Region, and Logistics. Each two-week module will be researched and facilitated by a pair of students. We will learn about food dehydration, calorie loss induced by winter traveling, and how to maintain and repair traditional winter camping gear such as mukluks, anoraks, and toboggans. We will also learn what goes into planning a longer-term trip by delving deeper into itinerary planning, risk assessment, group dynamics, and facilitation. The study will culminate in a ten-day expedition in Northern Quebec, which will have been entirely planned and executed by students. Preparation for this trip will include two weekend training trips, weekly reflections, and reading or movie discussions. Students will be expected to engage wholly in modules, be proactive about the planning and co-facilitation of their module, and contribute to the overall preparation of the expedition."
"The purpose of this group study is to deepen our understanding of winter camping through investigating local ecology and natural history in our expedition environment. This study will allow us to push our experiences and knowledge of winter camping and traditional skills, including nitty gritty logistics of planning such a large expedition, one that requires a high level of organization. In addition to planning, we will be required to have a deep understanding of the physical challenges there are to winter camping including understanding how the body reacts to extreme conditions. All of the participants in this study are pursuing an interest in outdoor education from different perspectives and this group study will act as a space to collaborate and grow together, sharing our strengths and interests while working toward our shared goals."
"Objects have long been significant elements in ritual, dance, theatre and performance art; they might be props, body extensions, idols and avatars. Taught in a workshop format, this course will explore a variety of techniques from traditional theatre arts, as well as sculptural ideas that can be integrated into performance. Goals will be to gain a deeper understanding of the power of objects in a performative context; to experiment with a variety of building techniques; to practice, create and refine personal and found objects as art; to explore an object's potential to spark narrative, illustrate relationship dynamics and fuel theatrical action. We'll also study the use of objects in connection with certain forms of performance training and creative collaboration strategies.  The course will provide an historic context of objects in performance and will utilize improvisational exercises, personal writing, movement and bodywork. Class topics may include: relationship, scale, sound, duration, repetition, archetype and viewer participation/performance. Evaluation will be based on attendance, participation in all group projects, in-class assignments and discussions, demonstrated understanding and mastery of basic skills through the creation of projects, timely completion of all assignments and readings and effective participation in class critiques. 

Level: Intermediate/Advanced.  Prerequisites: Movement Training (I or II) or 3D studio, and permission of either instructor.  Class limit: 12.  Lb fee: $50.  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS"
"This course will explore the rapidly expanding field of marine environmental history and historical studies that focus on fish and fisheries.  Recent methodological and conceptual work as well as growing interest in the history of these topics driven by conservation and policy issues has made this an important and innovative field.  Using the work of a variety of scholars from different fields the class will explore how historical accounts can be constructed with an emphasis on the types of available sources, the use of evidence, and how each author builds their argument.  We will explicitly compare the methods, use of evidence and other aspects of different disciplinary approaches to the topic to highlight the strengths and limitations of each approach.  This dimension of the class is particularly interesting because of the dynamic and interdisciplinary nature of scholarship right now that brings a wide range of research into dialogue. Students will learn about the history of oceans and fishes by looking at how historians and other scholars frame their works and make their arguments.  Students will be evaluated on their preparation for discussion, mastery of the material, short written assignments, and a final project made up of a presentation and essay.  This course is appropriate for students with interest in history, community-based research, marine studies, and environmental policy.  Students who are just curious and interested in lots of things are also most welcome.

Level: Intermediate. Class limit: 15  Lab Fee $75.00 Meets the following degree requirements: HS HY"
"This class examines concepts of rights, responsibility, and reparations in terms of questions about injustice. Over the course of the trimester, we will consider some of the ways these terms have been used in 20th and 21st century attempts to address the aftermath of intertwined histories of colonialism, slavery and capitalism. We will focus on examples that are different in terms of scale (e.g. institutions such as nation-states and schools, corporations, as well as individuals and groups, and the relations between them) , and which differ in terms of political, cultural, national, and historical context. The examples will be situated in relation to each other, not through comparison in terms of similarities and differences, but through historical and conceptual relation. We will examine examples from contexts that may include: South Africa’s Truth and Reconciliation Commission; Guatemala’s Commission for Historical Clarification; German Holocaust reparations and Israeli state formation; debates about and proposals for slavery reparations in the United States; College of the Atlantic’s efforts to reckon with its own histories, the controversy over the University of North Carolina’s “Silent Sam” confederate statue, and related discussions about how to “repair” and respond to the aftermaths of past wrongs, including debates over statues, the names of streets and buildings, the content and framing of school curriculums, and the relation between law and justice. This is an interdisciplinary course that draws from work in the Arts and Humanities, including in the fields and disciplines of postcolonial studies, literature, philosophy, history, feminist studies and cultural anthropology. Material will likely include texts by Hannah Arendt, Srinivas Aravamudan, Maoz Azaryahu, W.E.B. Du Bois, Roy L. Brooks, Tina Chanter, Ta-Nehisi Coates, J.M. Coeztee, Jacques Derrida, Euripides, Shoshana Felman, Sigmund Freud, Stuart Hall, Ranjana Khanna, Karl Marx, Chandra Mohanty, Jacques Rancière, Edward Said, Joan Scott, Hortense Spillers and Gayatri Spivak. Readings may include selections from Truth Commission reports and related documents, media articles, as well as fiction works including the play “ The Trojan Women,” the novel Disgrace and the films “Bridge Over the Wadi” and “Arna’s Children.” As we move through this material, we will consider questions about inheritance, capital, violence, choice, response, how an “individual” is understood in relation to group categories and contexts, and relations between politics and aesthetics. In doing so, we will address questions about and understandings of “freedom,” “reconciliation,” economic justice, difference and responsibility. Students will be evaluated based on class participation in seminar discussions, weekly reading responses, one short mid-term essay (3 pages) and one short final paper (5 pages). 

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisites:  Open to all college levels, but students should have some prior coursework or background in engaging with some of the conceptual questions that inform this course, and be prepared for a heavy reading load. Permission required. Class limit: 15. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"This course explores the physical, chemical, and environmental properties of carbon-containing materials such as plastics, solvents, dyes, as well as all living things, and once-living materials.  The emphasis is on learning fundamental principles that allow one to understand and to predict the behavior of various types of organic substances.  There is an optional Lab section.  Evaluations are based on midterm and final exam.  The equivalent of this course is a prerequisite for biochemistry.  

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisites: A previous chemistry course.  Offered every other year.  Class limit: 14.  Lab fee: $60.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES"
"This class will continue to discuss the occurrence and behavior of additional functional groups not covered in Organic Chemistry I. Meeting twice a week, we will work our way through the remainder of the fall text and then apply the material by reading articles from the current literature of environmental organic chemistry. Assessment will be based on keeping up with the reading, class participation, and three take-home problem sets.

Level: Advanced.  Prerequisite:  Organic Chemistry I. Class limit: 15. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: ES"
"This course provides an introduction to small-scale farm production and planning with an emphasis on organic vegetable production practices. This course includes lectures from professionals in the field, tours of local farms, and hands-on learning at COA’s Beech Hill Farm and Community Garden. Students will explore all aspects required to successfully plan and grow produce for an organic, small-scale market farm. Topics covered in the course will include soil health, crop botany, crop planning and rotation, pest control, disease and weed management, tractor safety and operation, farm budgeting, and farmland access strategies. Student evaluation will be based on attendance, participation in class discussion and activities, problem sets, and a final project focused on the development of a profit-oriented farm plan. 

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: Work on farms or gardens. Class limit: 10. Lab fee: $50. Meets the following degree requirements: ES."
"This course will introduce students to the basics of organic poultry management. The course will focus on raising poultry for meat production with some attention to egg production. All classes will be taught at Peggy Rockefeller Farm (PRF) or other local farms. Students will have the chance to work with chickens and turkeys at PRF. The course will meet once a week for three hours. In each class we will discuss an article about poultry husbandry and work hands-on with the flocks. Students will learn about the anatomy and physiology of poultry and the distinct features of raising meat versus egg breeds. We will cover poultry nutritional needs, common diseases that affect flocks (e.g., bird flu), and learn how to keep flock records and budgets. Week one of the course, students will begin caring for newly hatched chicks. Throughout the term students will learn how to care for their flock of birds by participating in daily poultry chores (feeding and watering), rotational grazing, and monitoring for disease. For the final project students will participate in the slaughter and packaging of the meat birds and determine how they want to market and distribute them. Options could include hosting a pop-up market, donating them to a local food access organization, helping prepare them for COA’s dining hall, or something else. Students will be evaluated based on class participation (participation in discussions, activities, and field trips; feeding and caring for the flock), a reflection paper, and the final project.

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 8.  Lab fee: $40. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"Families are a touchstone of many people’s identity, and stories about where we come from and who came before us are often key ways of orienting ourselves and understanding who we are. Storytelling, documentary and photographic collections, and other methods of preserving memories serve as the very concrete ways that many of us come to learn about our immediate family and our ancestors. New techniques of genetic testing provide a method that can contribute to that understanding and in some cases fill in blanks left about ancestors and provide a new source of stories in addition to those passed along from generation to generation. Recreational DNA testing can also provoke discussion about how to make sense of the genetic stories revealed and how they mesh with or challenge people’s sense of themselves. This class will explore the traditional methods of collecting family histories (oral history, genealogical research) and recreational genetic testing as a point of entry into complex issues around history, memory, ethics, race and the role of new technologies. Students will learn the basic skills of doing genealogical research as well as develop an understanding of the strengths and limitations of human genetic testing, which can reveal our shared history as well as our differences. Evaluation will be based on class participation, short assignments, and a final project. The expectations surrounding the final project explain why this course is designated as intermediate even though there are no specific pre-requisites. Students will be expected to conceptualize, plan and carry out their own projects, and they will be evaluated on their ability to self-direct, seek feedback and complete those projects. This class is appropriate for a wide range of students with diverse interests concerning identity and history.

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisite: None. Class limit: 15. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"The study of ornithology is as old as human society itself.  Birds are particularly conspicuous elements of our world, and figure prominently in our art, religious symbolism, mythology, scientific endeavors and even sport.  Birds appear in European paleolithic cave paintings from 14,000 years ago, domesticated fowl are known from India circa 3000 BC, and ancient scholars such as Aristotle and Pliny the Elder devoted considerable time to ornithological observations.  In this century great strides have been made in the study of population biology and ecology, navigation and migration, and human induced ecological change (sometimes called human ecology), all through the study of birds. This class introduces the student to the ornithological world by using both scientific literature and direct field observation.  Systematics and physiology will be reviewed, but much of our effort will concentrate on reproductive ecology, behavior and the environment, and population dynamics.  There will be a strong emphasis on field observation - learning how to look at birds and their behavior in order to perhaps make larger observations about their environment.

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 14.  Lab fee: $75."
"This course is an investigation of how we consume and are consumed by music.  Topics include youth and subcultures of music, power and identity, the politics of location, and fan cultures. We will listen to punk rock, hip hop, riot grrrl, shoegaze, noise, psych, death metal, doom drone, post rock, grindcore and pop (among others); we will analyze visual artists who come to represent musical movements (such as Raymond Pettibon & Winston Smith, Fab 5 Freddy & Cey Adams) and we will read socio-cultural criticism of the times and places from which these artists sprang (Joan Didion, Steve Waksman, Theodor Adorno, Tobi Vale, Kathleen Hanna and Kevin Young).  The class will explore analogue artifacts from the 70s, 80s & 90s (posters, zines, fine art, videos) and compare them to digital artifacts found today on the internet.  Students are required to attend all weekly film screenings and sound sessions.  Evaluations will be based on regular critical responses, a final project and participation in discussion and class activities.  

Level: Introductory/Intermediate.  Prerequisites: none.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"What is language? What is the relationship between language and thought? Between language and experience? What is meaning? These are some of the central questions of the philosophy of language. They are fundamental not only to large portions to modern philosophy, but also linguistics, computer science and other fields. This course will explore some of the key theories and criticisms that philosophers have developed in answer to these questions about our life with words.

In this course, we will take a historical approach and work our way to the present, exploring classic theories of meaning and language from the early modern period and early analytic philosophers, such as Mill, Frege, Russell, Wittgenstein, and others. Then we will examine criticisms that philosophers have raised over the years, both from texts in the analytic tradition as well as other positions from, for example, ordinary language philosophy, continental approaches. Students will acquire an understanding of those central problems in the philosophy of language; they will also develop philosophical skills in analysing texts, articulating arguments, and presenting complex philosophical material through writing and oral presentations. Introductory/Intermediate.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"By definition ""public lands"" belong to all of us, yet public lands in this country have a history of use (and abuse) by special interests and a shocking absence of any coherent management strategy for long-term sustainability.  This course is taught in seminar format in which students read and discuss several environmental policy and history texts that concern the history and future of our federal lands.  We also use primary historic documents and texts to understand the origins of public ownership and management.  We examine the legal, philosophical, ecological, and political problems that have faced our National Parks, wildlife refuges, national forests, and other public lands.  An effort is made to sort out the tangle of laws and conflicting policies that govern these public resources.  Special attention is given to the historic roots of current policy debates.  Evaluation is based upon response papers, a class presentation, participation in class discussions, and a group project looking closely at the historical context and policy implications of a management issue facing a nearby public land unit.  

Level: Intermediate.   Prerequisite:  Introductory history or policy class recommended.  Class limit: 25.  Lab fee $25.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS HY"
"Students investigate several techniques for conceptualizing and creating a visual notion utilizing oil-based media. While honing their capacity to express creative purpose, they look at both conventional and modern applications. Students build grounds for oil-based media, support structures for paintings, and complete picture documentation of their work while adhering to professional standards. Evaluation will be based on painting projects and participation in class discussions and critiques. Students should have taken a previous introductory college level course in painting. The lab fee covers all course materials.

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: previous introductory college level course in painting. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: $100.  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS"
"Using Carl Lavery's question for the performing arts as a starting point, this course investigates live performance’s historical and contemporary engagement with ecological concerns. Our course will begin by establishing a common language for discussing theatre. We will then explore a range of international performance, while learning about the contexts (environmental, cultural, and institutional) that influence their development, production and reception. We will focus our attention on the interaction between narrative, embodied, and material elements within these performances while reading sections from texts in literary ecocriticism, performance studies, theatre history, environmental history, and anthropology. If in-person, there will be one fieldtrip mid-semester. Key questions will include: how might the body of a performer complicate the distinction between “environment” and “society”? What are the means by which we can categorize a play or a production as “ecological”? What are the specific affective narratives embedded within environmentalist discourse and how might performance interrupt or complicate those? What might have performance already done for the environment? Course goals are to refine our skill set for analyzing the relationship between scientific facts and narrative, a better sense of the impact that live performance can have on the various communities where it takes place, and a sharper framework for engaging an audience with questions regarding the “natural” world. Major works will likely include: Manuela Infante’s Estado Vegetal; the Rude Mechanicals’ Not Every Mountain; Rolling Ryot’s Rainforest Reverb; Anne Washburn’s Mr. Burns, a Post-Electric Play; Chantal Bilodeau’s Sila; Grupo Sotzil’s Uk’u’x Ulew; William Shakespeare’s The Tempest and The Winter’s Tale; Adam R. Burnett’s Mammoth: A De-extinction Love Story; Animal Facts Club’s Gulf of Maine; Art At Work MAINEUSA’s Blessing of the Creatures; Shawna Dempsey & Lorri Millan’s Lesbian National Parks and Services. Students will be evaluated through eight weekly responses, a mid-term performance-and-production analysis exercise, and a final project of their choosing.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: Some interest and/or previous coursework in art history, dramatic literature, literature, performance analysis is recommended but not required. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: $85."
"Financial decisions are often a reflection of personal beliefs encompassing lifestyle, ethics, personal worth, security and numerous other factors. Personal Finance and Impact Investing merges an exploration of personal financial choices with a broader exploration and introduction to impact investing. To ground the discussion, students will forecast and analyze their present and future financial needs, investigating various scenarios. Then the class will examine investing fundamentals and explore the emerging field of impact investing.

Impact investors use a multitude of investing strategies and mechanisms to simultaneously seek social, environmental and financial returns. They create avenues for private investment to work alongside non-governmental organizations, large corporations, small businesses and others to help solve global and local problems. Impact investments have funded solutions in diverse arenas including food systems, climate change, poverty, affordable housing, clean technology and public health.

Through readings, discussions and class projects students will explore the benefits and pitfalls of different strategies and the potential of investments to create social and environmental change. During the course students will learn how to create financial projections and evaluate the financial returns of enterprises. For their final project, students will have to recommend an investment platform that generates returns financially, socially and/or environmentally.  Students will be evaluated based on class participation, written assignments and verbal presentations.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced.  Prerequisites: None, but it is recommended that students have taken a prior Sustainable Business course such as: Financials, Business Nonprofit Basics, Sustainable Strategies or Launching a New Venture.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: $10.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"Good and evil are timeless topics and they have motivated centuries of philosophical thinking. Although the terms “good” and “evil” are commonly used across a range of discourses, they are ambiguous, equivocal, and contested concepts. In an effort to explore different ideas about good and evil, this course provides a broad overview of the issues, arguments, and debates that shape philosophical ethics. Guiding questions include the following: What are the origins of good and evil? What makes an action right or wrong? Why do we act morally? What should we do with someone who commits a horrific act? Who decides what counts as a horrific act? What kinds of ethical theories operate without the concepts of good and evil? Is evil an outdated or relevant concept? Do the concepts of good and evil help or hinder moral thinking?

To critically unpack these questions, we will read works by ethical thinkers including Immanuel Kant, John Stuart Mill, Hannah Arendt, Zhuangzi, Simone de Beauvoir, Abû Nasr al-Fârâbî, Nell Noddings, Peter Singer, Kwame Gyekye, Mencius, Sherman Alexie, and others. Along the way, we will study deontology, utilitarianism, contractarianism, ethical relativism, feminist ethics, Taoism, and existential ethics. In addition, we will unpack the ethical arguments that orbit concrete topics such as execution, murder, moral character, racial injustice, and our ethical duties to one another.

This course will familiarize students with the influential frameworks of ethical philosophy, and it will encourage students to apply these frameworks to specific ethical problems. Course requirements include class participation, three short papers, a reflection essay, and a final paper or project. There are no prerequisites for this course, but students should be prepared to engage with difficult, philosophical texts and to discuss these texts in class. 

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: None, but students should be prepared to engage difficult, philosophical texts and to discuss these texts in class.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: None..  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"This course investigates the intellectual history of  concepts of love that provide  origins for notions of it central in our time.  Is love the key to giving meaning to our individual lives? Is it a transformative power that can empower and heal us and our societies? How are the many different concepts of it related? To what extent are these concepts grounded in biological, historical, philosophical or spiritual truths – or mere reflections of collective myths, self delusions or manipulative deceptions?  How can we as individuals most fully realize ourselves? How can our society best promote flourishing lives and how can this be brought about? The theme of love winds like an Ariadnean thread through the labyrinth of  the history of ideas about the nature of  self, Other, community, knowledge, reality and ethics. The class uses overview materials from intellectual historians like de Rougemont,  Singer and May. It picks away through central passages in that labyrinth by reading key selections from Plato,  New Testament writers, Medieval poets, Nietzsche, de Beauvoir, Irigary, Gandhi, King, Levinas, Thich Nhat Hanh, Mortimer-Sandilands, pop culture and others. Class format relies on seminar discussion with occasional short lectures. Goals of the course are to advance students’ abilities to critically analyze texts in context in intellectual history, and to advance understanding of nuanced ways key ideas in epistemology, metaphysics, ethics and social-change theories inform and are informed by concepts including: eros, philia, agape, courtly love (fin amour), love force/satyagraha, romantic love, ahimsa, and compassion. Students will be responsible for leading seminar  sessions. There will be one problem set, two short papers and a term project presented in class as well as developed in a final paper of 15-20 pages. Includes a lab session for viewing films and television and discussing student work. 

Level: Intermediate/Advanced.  Prerequisites: At least one prior course in intellectual history, philosophy or comparable class in human studies.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: none.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"This course philosophically explores the concepts of death, dying, killing, and life. Topics include the soul, the afterlife, euthanasia, physician-assisted suicide, evolving medical definitions of life and death, hospice and end-of-life care, the ethics of killing, biotechnologies, and cross-cultural conceptions of death and grief. Although this course is primarily grounded in the Western philosophical and bioethical traditions, we will also consider non-Western perspectives in an effort to both clarify and complicate our conceptions of death and dying. The purpose of this course is not to articulate conclusive answers, but rather to compel students to think philosophically about the many profound questions that arise in the face of death. This is a discussion-based course and students should be prepared to engage and discuss challenging philosophical literature. Students will be evaluated on the basis of weekly writing assignments, a midterm, a final, and class participation. 

Level: Introductory/Intermediate.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"What makes science special? In answering this question, this course will look at several more specific inquiries: Is science rational? Does science have an aim and does this aim have anything to do with truth or with reality? Is there a scientific method? Can science tell us how to live our lives? How should we understand the relationship between science and other systems of thought? This course will address these questions by examining texts from a number of 20th century philosophers. We begin with the earlier part of the century and the logical positivists. With this groundwork, we will then analyze the movement in philosophy of science towards an emphasis on history and on scientific practice, especially work by Kuhn, Feyerabend, and Toulmin. The final part of the course will discuss responses to these philosophers. By taking this course, students will become familiar with central issues in the philosophy of science, how to read dense texts, and how to develop a philosophical argument through writing. Students will be evaluated based on class participation, two take-home exams, and a final term paper.

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 12.  Lab Fee: none. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"In this course students will learn content and skills so that they can participate effectively in sustainable energy projects, make personal and community decisions that reduce carbon emissions, and work in ventures in sustainable energy.  Additionally, this course will be useful for those interested in energy and climate policy, either internationally or domestically.  We will begin with a quick overview of current CO2 emissions levels and look at how this is related to energy use.  We will then turn our attention to basic ideas from physics, including the definition of energy and the difference between energy and power.  The bulk of the course will consist of a survey of different forms of energy consumption and generation.  Throughout, we will quantitatively analyze technology from both a local and global point of view.  For example, we will calculate how much electricity one can generate on a rooftop, and we will also examine the role that solar PV could play toward the goal of eliminating fossil fuel use worldwide.  In a unit on financial mathematics, students will learn about the time value of money and several ways of quantifying investments, including ROI (return on investment) and IRR (internal rate of return).  Students will apply these financial tools in several short case studies.  If time permits, we may also cover negative emissions technologies and the electrical grid, including grid stability issues and the potential of smart-grid technology. This will be a demanding, introductory, class. Evaluation will be based on weekly problem sets. 

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: None.  Class Limit: 30.  Lab fee $10.00  Meets the following degree requirements: QR ES"
"This course is the first of a two course sequence covering a range of standard introductory physics topics. The goals of the course are: to introduce students to important physical ideas both conceptually and mathematically; and to help students improve their quantitative skills. The first part of the course consists of a broad look at the three conservation laws: the conservation of momentum, energy, and angular momentum.  Along the way, we'll learn about vectors, work, potential energy, thermal energy, and the energy stored in chemical bonds. We'll conclude with a treatment of Newton's laws of motion.  If time permits, we may briefly cover some topics from chaotic dynamics.  Evaluations will be based on participation in class and lab, weekly homework, and two untimed, open-notes exams. This course makes extensive use of algebra and trigonometry. Potentially difficult math topics will be reviewed as necessary. Prerequisites: Understanding Functions, a strong high school algebra background, or consent of the instructor.

Level:  Introductory. Class limit: 20.  Lab fee: $40.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES QR"
"What are relativity and quantum mechanics, and why were they viewed as revolutionary when they were formulated in the early 1900s? How and why does relativity and quantum mechanics compel us to discard commonsense ideas about the nature of the physical world that are part of classical mechanics?  Why is there not agreement on how to interpret quantum mechanics, and why does quantum mechanics even need interpretation? This version of Physics II covers Einstein's theory of special relativity and selected topics in quantum mechanics, and is designed to introduce students to some of the formalism and central results of relativity and quantum mechanics, so that they can formulate scientifically grounded answers to the above questions. Throughout the course we will start with first principles and carefully build toward key results, allowing students to see how relativity and quantum mechanics—two of the pillars of modern physics—were constructed and how they cohere as mathematically consistent and experimentally verified theories. The first half of the course will cover relativity topics including the principle of relativity, spacetime intervals and proper time, coordinate transformations, time dilation and Lorentz contraction, and relativistic energy and momentum. The second half of the course will turn toward the foundations of quantum mechanics, including: spin-1/2 particles, wave-particle duality, and Bell's inequalities and the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen paradox. If time permits, we may cover additional topics such as blackbody radiation, the photoelectric effect, Bohr's model of the hydrogen atom, and quantum cryptography. To gain a sense of the scientific, social, and material context in which the theories of relativity and quantum mechanics were developed, we will read a number of papers and book chapters by historians and philosophers of science. This course is designed to appeal to a wide range of students—both those whose interests lie outside of science as well as those who are drawn toward the sciences or mathematics. Students who take this course should be comfortable working with mathematical abstraction. Evaluation is based on weekly problem sets, participation in weekly discussion sections, and several short reflection assignments.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Class limit: 30.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES, QR"
"Systematics is the scientific study of classification, specifically the placement of organisms into groups based on their common descent. This course focuses on the classification of land plants, with a particular focus on herbaceous taxa found in coastal Maine. Through lectures and field, lab, and herbarium work, we will gain familiarity with the practice of systematics and the characteristics of plants that are used to infer their phylogenetic relationships. Lectures will cover the theory and practice of systematics, including botanical nomenclature, plant identification terminology, relationships among the major plant groups and characters with taxonomic significance, herbarium specimen preparation, and bioinformatics. Labs will cover collection methods, specimen preparation, and field characters for about 30 plant families in the region. Evaluation will be based on participation, field and lab quizzes, a 5-minute oral presentation on a plant species chosen by the instructor and a 15-minute oral presentation on a topic in plant systematics chosen by the student, and a collection of at least 30 plant specimens from at least 20 different families prepared and identified by the student. Students should plan to begin collecting specimens over the summer in preparation for the course, following guidance that will be provided to registered students during the spring term. Please note: all collecting must be done in accordance with state and federal laws; there must be NO collecting in Acadia National Park and no importation of specimens from outside the US.

Level: Advanced.  Prerequisite: Biology Form & Function and Trees and Shrubs of MDI or equivalent knowledge of local flora. Class limit: 15. Lab fee: $40. Meets the following degree requirements: ES."
"This class offers an introduction to plant biology centered around plants that are useful to human societies. We will explore plant anatomy, physiology, evolution, and ecology through case studies involving plants that are useful to humans. Through lectures, readings, and discussions, students will gain a rich understanding of how plants function and how human societies depend on them in myriad ways. We will cover universal and familiar uses of plants such as food, building materials, and textiles, as well as less widely practiced uses including arrow poisons, lacquers, and living fences. We will discuss the origins of agriculture and methods of plant breeding, as well as the biogeographical history of important cultivated plant lineages. The focus will be on plants and our uses for them, but we will also discuss ethical concerns surrounding practices like bioprospecting and ex situ conservation. Students will be evaluated on participation and the successful completion of two presentations and a research paper.

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: None. Class Limit: 20. Lab fee: none. Meets the following degree requirements: ES"
"The proportion of people living in cities is increasing worldwide. As we hasten to make our cities and towns sustainable in the face of climate change, more livable and healthy for the world’s population, we will need to integrate plants more intelligently into our built environments. Green roofs, rain gardens, and bioswales are successful examples of highly designed plant communities that serve multiple functions in the built environment. Yet, generally, urban landscapes present challenging and extreme living conditions for many plants.

In this botany course we examine plant adaptation to extreme environments. What do alpine plants have in common with plants in a desert, or beside a highway? What mechanisms and morphologies enable plants to withstand heat, drought or water loss? With awareness that plants are the foundation of our own habitat, we explore these questions through lectures, lab sessions, and field trips to local sites.
This course is intended for students with previous botany coursework who want to deepen their appreciation of plants and their adaptations.  Evaluations are based on weekly quizzes, an exam, a field/lab notebook, and class participation.

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisites: ES1054 Biology: Form and Function. Class limit: 11.  Lab fee: $20."
"This course adopts a workshop format, focusing on the management of living plant collections on the COA campus. Emphasis will be on planting and maintenance of woody plants, but some attention will be paid to perennial herbaceous ornamentals. Class activities will include hands-on projects, e.g. pruning campus trees, shrubs, and vines, planting new accessions for the campus-wide arboretum, identifying and labeling plants, developing a map and tour guide for campus plants, studying planting design principals and site requirements, and developing a plan for future additions to the campus-wide arboretum, strategies for dealing with invasive exotics, and replacement of specimen trees. This course may be especially appropriate for those interested in horticulture and landscape architecture. There are no course prerequisites, but some background in design or horticulture is helpful, such as a prior course in plant taxonomy, gardening, arts and design, or architecture. Students will be evaluated on class participation, completion of assignments and an individual project. 

Level: Introductory/Intermediate.  Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 16.  Lab fee: $40."
"The Arctic and Antarctic represent some of the most extreme environments on the planet. As physical places, both poles play an important role in governing the planet’s climate and heat flow. Both are suspected to be rich in minerals and are thought to perhaps hold short-term relief from current world shortages in natural resources. As ecosystems, both are hugely productive in spite of, and in part because of the extreme temperatures they experience; certain species are found nowhere else and in fact thrive in these remote locales. Superimposed upon these natural environments is the presence of humans. Exploration of both areas has been particularly focused in the past century, with countless stories of the perseverance and persistence of our pioneering spirit. Initially surveyed to forward nationalistic agendas, both poles are now sites of scientific inquiry. In particular, the political model that currently governs Antarctica as one massive Protected Area has no precedent and perhaps suggests a way forward for environmental agendas working on global scales. More recently, the poles have been exploited by ecotourism businesses.

This class examines the provinces of the Arctic and Antarctic, wildernesses whose boundaries can be defined physically, biologically, geologically and politically. We will examine the rich and highly adapted diversity of life as it is affected by local and global oceanography and atmospheric science, and assess the impacts of climate change on these fragile environments. We will also review our relationship with these places and examine what future we might play in preserving, and/or exploiting the polar regime, using Human Ecology as a model for our understanding. Evaluation will be by two term papers and participation in class activities. 

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: $50.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES."
"This course focuses on policing in communities of color. We will examine the long and continuing history of destructive and violent policing toward Black people in the United States. We will also situate that history in the context of other ongoing crises including the decades long war on drugs and the disproportionate mass incarceration of people of color in US prisons. The course will especially focus on the efforts of organizations such as Black Lives Matter to reduce the high level of deaths of black people at the hands of police as well as their advocacy for the “defunding” of police. We will also examine strategies to reduce both implicit bias and explicit bias among police officers, as well as efforts to reduce the distrust of police in communities of color by training police in effective skills for de-escalating tense situations. We will examine recent efforts by the United States Department of Justice to improve policing by the use of restraining orders. As a point of comparison, we will spend some of our time reviewing recent or ongoing work conducted in Europe to develop and implement training programs for police officers with the aim to reduce unnecessary and unlawful violence toward Roma people. In addition to the readings, students can expect presentations from and discussions with guest speakers who have been recently working to address the harms of police violence, both in the US and abroad. Student evaluation will be based on class participation, a series of short written responses related to readings, a longer form essay or short fictional story related to a single reading, the drafting of an Opinion Editorial piece regarding the effectiveness of “defunding” the police, and a written response to a case study that is coauthored with a partner.

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 16. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"The U.S. Supreme Court has been called ""the most powerful court in the world,""  and yet the founders regarded the judiciary as ""the least dangerous branch"" of government, exercising ""neither force nor will, but merely judgment."" (Alexander Hamilton) This seminar will examine the three branches of the U.S. national government, with its primary focus on the Supreme Court. We will assess the relations among the branches at the beginning of the twenty-first century, asking whether separation of powers and 'checks and balances' exist today. Added focus on executive authority (including the increased use of executive orders by the President) and legislative powers (often under conditions of stalemate). Is the Supreme Court supreme in its power?  What does it do?  Does the Supreme Court ""interpret the law""?   Does it, in fact, make public policy, by mediating conflicts over values and power at the national level?  Was Hamilton ""wrong"" in his projection of its role in American national government?   The Supreme Court in recent years has been at the ""storm center"" of protracted disputes on segregation, abortion, affirmative action, marriage and partnering, free exercise of religion, and the death penalty.  Can the Court resolve these national disputes more easily than other governmental institutions?  And, if so, why? Is the Supreme Court resolution of disputes circumventing our ""democratic"" institutions?

This seminar seeks to improve our understanding of how the Supreme Court functions and to develop our analytic skills about rival claims of liberal or conservative ideologies at work.  Main topics include:  judicial politics and appointments, jurisdiction, standing, collegial decision-making, adhering to or undermining key precedents, judicial activism and restraint, and the impact of judicial holdings.  Evaluation will be based upon class participation, two short papers, and a research-based term paper.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: none. Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"Drawing on performance studies, movement training, postcolonial studies and feminist theory, this class will investigate understandings of what is made to count as ""political"" in relation to claims about representation and the body. Over the course of the term, we will investigate and produce a range of conditions through which we consider ideas about responsibility, decision, the unknown and unexpected, repetition and difference, translation and dialogue, and relations of individual to group. We will do so through learning about the ways in which bodies matter in the fields of theatre, anthropology and literature. Both anthropology and theatre are often presumed to be vehicles for representation and for political change, but they have also posed questions about how the body challenges assumptions about representation and politics. This course will grapple with assumptions that politics is primarily about representation, speaking in ""one’s own name,"" or in the name of others. We will take questions about representation and its limits as a point of departure to consider the significance of the body (and bodies) for understandings of politics. We will focus on questions of affect, the sensory, proximity, temporality, scale and place. In so doing, we will consider the idea of politics as based on a relation and response to an other, rather than on representation. In turn, we will address questions about the relationship between art and politics. Classes will include movement training practices and seminar discussion. Course materials may include works by Hannah Arendt, Anne Bogart, Charlie Chaplin, Charles Darwin, Jacques Derrida, Sarah DeLappe, Cornelius Eady, Shoshana Felman, Sigmund Freud, Brandon Jacobs-Jenkins, Valeria Luiselli, Jean-Luc Nancy, William Shakespeare, Sophocles, Tadashi Suzuki and Anna Tsing. Students will be evaluated based on class participation,  collaborative group projects, seminar discussion, short topic responses, and a final project. 

Level: Advanced.  Prerequisites: permission of instructor; priority will be given to students who have successfully completed advanced coursework in Literature, Anthropology or Performance Studies. Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $50. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"Ecology, in the narrowest sense, is the study of the distribution and abundance of organisms on the earth. This class focuses on ecology as a science, and particularly the intellectual tradition within ecology that has sought to develop simple mathematical descriptions of complex phenomena. Population ecology studies the growth and decline of populations (i.e., groups of organisms of the same species), while community ecology studies the interactions among populations. We will study classic models in population and community ecology, developing the models from first principles, applying them to real data, and critically examining the shortcomings of the modeling approach. Concepts to be covered in the class include exponential vs. logistic population growth, competition, predator-prey interactions, metapopulation dynamics, stochastic vs. deterministic processes, optimal foraging theory, succession, and behavioral ecology.This course will be useful for students who are considering graduate school in ecology and related disciplines, and it is open to anyone with relevant background knowledge and curiosity. Students will be evaluated based on participation in class discussions, a series of problem sets, and a final paper.

Knowledge of algebra is necessary, along with a willingness to grapple with mathematical thinking. Knowledge of calculus and linear algebra is helpful but is not required.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced.  Prerequisites: At least one intermediate course in ecology and a knowledge of algebra.  Class limit: 20.  Lab fee: none.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES, QR"
"This course examines the concept of the human through an exploration of the concept of possession. Contemporary understandings of the human have been influenced by the political frameworks of European modernity and its philosophical roots, all the way back to Aristotle’s claim that what differentiates the human from other animals is the capacity for speech, which is also what, he argued, makes the human a “political animal. “ Within this history, categories of difference internal and external to European political community, including women, colonized, slaves, homosexuals, Jews, and the insane, have been considered as less than fully human. In contrast, the fully human has been historically defined in terms of possession of one’s self through the possession of reason, property, territory, autonomy and the capacity for self-representation through language. 

Over the course of the term, we will examine how those who have been defined as less than fully human challenge oppositions through which the idea of the self-possessed, autonomous human has been defined – oppositions of mind and body, reason and madness, thought and emotion, masculine and feminine, object and subject, religious and secular, and thus also human and animal. Doing so will allow us to rethink concepts such as “rights,” “consent,” “self-representation,” “value,” “autonomy,” “transparency,” “equality,” “freedom,” and “community.” What might it mean to rethink political claims made in the name of “humanity” in terms of notions of dispossession and being possessed (by language, madness, desire, divine forces or other forms of difference) ? What might it mean to think about relating to others and the self through difference rather than sameness? What might it mean for our understandings of the relation between art and politics if we think about politics as based on translation rather than on self-representation and inclusion? Drawing on psychoanalysis, anthropology, postcolonial studies, political economy, literature, religion and feminist theory, this course considers states such as hysteria, melancholia, speaking in tongues, and ecstasy, as well as states of slavery, colonialism, and poverty to consider the political, social and environmental implications of how we define the human. Students will be evaluated based on attendance, in-class participation, weekly reading responses, and two short analytical essays. This is an intermediate level course. Prior work in at least one human studies or related arts course is strongly recommended.

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisites: Prior coursework in Human Studies or related Arts courses is strongly recommended.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: $10.  Meets the following degree requirements:  HS"
"This course focuses on islands – geopolitically and conceptually – to consider the significance of postcolonial difference for contemporary political questions about representation, violence, exile and diaspora, climate change, poverty, racialization and sexuality. Islands have long been imagined as sites of fantastic possibility and power, as places of refuge and respite as well as places of horror and dread. They are places imagined as home to cannibals and monsters, but also as idyllic vacations spots and safe havens for shipwrecked sailors. Etymologically, the word island carries with it the meaning of both land and water, and islands are defined as fragments of a whole, and simultaneously as whole unto themselves, raising questions about binaries and boundaries between self and other and about the conceptual topographies of territory, land and water, thresholds between here and there. Islands have been sites ripe for colonial ventures, understood as isolated, insular and susceptible to translation and appropriation but also as resistant, bounded and singular, fertile sites of diversity. Islands have also been significant in religious understandings of them as sites for communion with God or as final places of burial. This course will examine islands in these terms as they have been articulated in the literary imagination, in postcolonial studies and ethnography, and in political theory. Drawing on examples such as Defoe’s Robinson Crusoe, J.M. Coetzee’s Foe, The Odyssey, Plato’s Atlantis, Jonathan Swift’s Gulliver’s Travels, Shakespeare’s The Tempest, Octave Mannoni’s Prospero and Caliban, Aime Cesaire’s A Tempest, as well as on ethnography in Island Studies (including classic ethnography such as Malinowski’s Trobriand Islands, and recent scholarship such as “The Island Studies Journal” and A World of Islands), we will consider questions about political representation, language and translation, religious, ethnic and sexual difference, the definition of the human, mobility and sovereignty, resistance and domination. Students will be evaluated based on attendance, in-class participation, reading responses, one short analytical essay, and a final exploratory research project that examines Mt. Desert Island in the context of course materials. 

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisites: none. Class limit: 10.  Lab fee: $10.  Meets the following degree requirements:  HS"
"In her introduction to Post-colonial Shakespeares, Ania Loomba says, “Shakespeare lived and wrote at a time when English mercantile and colonial enterprises were just germinating.” The star of Shakespeare and colonialism rose at the same time, making Shakespeare’s work a symbol of colonial supremacy. As such, you cannot be a literature student without encountering Shakespeare; the canon has made sure of that. While those who loved the Empire see Shakespeare as an exemplar of English ideals, anti and post-colonial theorists and artists beg to differ.

Therefore, this course will be an introduction to some such theorists and artists. We will read Shakespeare’s plays like Othello, The Tempest, and others from among the following—Macbeth, Hamlet, King Lear, A Midsummer Night’s Dream, Much Ado About Nothing—with an eye toward postcolonial interpretations, thinking about the issues of race, power, hierarchy, and others. We will also spend some time exploring adaptations of his work that come from Asia, Africa, and other parts of the world, providing new avenues of postcoloniality.

You will be evaluated on class participation, short papers, an oral presentation, and a final project. In addition, you will be required to attend at least four of the weekly screenings, and you’ll receive extra credit for attending more.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 15. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: HS."
"The course considers the definition of the human by bringing together the field of postcolonial studies with the field of psychoanalysis. Both postcolonial studies and psychoanalysis engage questions of sexualized and racialized difference in the context of 20th century Europe and the legacies of colonialism. Postcolonial studies and psychoanalysis both also contend with notions of individual and collective well-being, with belonging and exclusion. 

Psychoanalysis is a colonial discipline which produced a form of analysis that emerged in the time of colonialism. As such, psychoanalysis contributed to colonial notions of civilized and primitive, of man and woman, of normal and abnormal, of Europe and its others. At the same time, however, contexts of anticolonial struggle in turn shaped psychoanalytic thought. By examining texts central to these two fields, this course considers how psychoanalytic thought can help us understand the processes through which individuated subjects become defined in terms of collective groups of belonging such as the nation, and how filiation and family is connected to affiliation and nation, through relations of affect and concepts of representational politics.

We will begin with an introduction to the inception of psychoanalysis in Europe, and examine how it travels and is taken up in Europe’s colonies. Drawing on postcolonial theory and literature, we will learn about the historical emergence of the term “postcolonial,” the political and disciplinary debates to which the term gave rise, and its relation to ideas of nationalism, diaspora, Orientalism. Geographically, we will examine examples of anticolonial struggle in Algeria, India, and Palestine/Israel. Readings will focus on texts by Sigmund Freud, Jacques Derrida, the Subaltern Studies group, and scholars who directly engage with these thinkers, including Jacques Lacan, Frantz Fanon, Edward Said, and Gayatri Spivak. Students will be evaluated based on class participation, reading responses, a mid-term essay and final paper. 

Level: Introductory/Intermediate.  Prerequisites: Prior coursework in Literature, Anthropology or related fields recommended. Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $10.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"This is a hands-on, project-based class in which students will collaboratively plan for and participate in all aspects of renewable energy projects on College of the Atlantic's campus.  Examples of projects include installation of a solar photovoltaic array, airsealing and insulating one of the college's buildings, or planning and installing a greenhouse heating system. Students will learn how to take a project from design through fruition while navigating the various phases of the project lifecycle including operation and maintenance. The course will begin with an overview of existing technology and an analysis of the current energy generation and consumption data for the project site(s). The class will then plan the project and present this plan to the community. As part of this planning process, students will learn about the economics of renewable energy systems, including return on investment (ROI), internal rate of return (IRR), and related quantities. Students who successfully complete this class will gain the skills necessary to conceptualize, plan for, finance, and implement renewable energy projects.  Evaluation will be based on several short presentations, problem sets, and active and effective participation in all aspects of the project. Default grade is Credit/No Credit.

Level: Intermediate. Pre-requisites: Physics and Mathematics of Sustainable Energy is strongly recommended.  Class limit: 10. Lab Fee: $50 Meets the following degree requirements: none."
"Primitive skills are the knowledge, practices, and simple tools unique to a specific bio-region that allowed the ancestors of modern humans to thrive in every corner of the earth without agriculture or industry.  Knowledge of these primitive, or “primary,” skills  have been passed down and honed through countless generations, and are still practiced today as a way of connecting with our deep past, the natural world, and a simpler, more intentional way of life. Through this course you will learn Maine-based primitive skills at COA's Peggy Rockefeller bush-camp, explore primitive skills as a global movement and delve into its philosophical foundations, and track the nature of your evolving relationship with, well, nature. Together we will learn a suite of essential bushcraft skills that are part of a millennia old living tradition of how to travel through and thrive in Maine's eco-regions and seasons.  Some of the core survival skills covered include fire making, shelter building, foraging/hydration, and axe and knife work.  But learning how to thrive in the Maine woods requires a very diverse set of knowledge and you will be introduced to: practical botany, cordage and knots, canoeing, animal tracking, traditional craft, navigation, mental preparedness, medicinal plants, first aid, and more. We will explore these topics through readings, videos, and practicum experiences.  The driving question of our inquiry is to explore, and experience, the value that primitive skills bring to contemporary life. This class will have one 1.5 hour classroom session and one 3 hour field session per week. Additionally there will be 2 weekend field trips (dates to be determined by the class).  Student evaluation  will be based on practicum skill assessments, self-reflection through journaling, and an individual research project. This class is open to all students regardless of their previous background or experience with primitive or outdoor skills. However, students will be expected to engage in moderately strenuous physical activity, including: hikes up to 4 miles, chopping and carrying wood, building structures out of small trees weighing up to 50lbs.  Anyone with an interest in primitive skills, outdoor survival, place-based education, or experiential learning would benefit from the class.

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 11.  Lab fee: $150"
"Food is central to the human experience. It can bring us profound joy and a sense of belonging to a place, to a people, and to ourselves. And yet, food is frequently used as an additional form of punishment for the nearly 2 million people incarcerated in jails and prisons across the United States. In this course, students will learn about different kinds of prison food systems, from those using food to dehumanize incarcerated people, to those using food as a tool to help promote rehabilitation and support successful reentry. We will explore this topic through readings, lectures, field trips, and interviews with folks working to transform prison food systems. Simultaneously, students will learn how to produce a podcast from start-to-finish in order to share the stories they gather.

To understand the U.S. carceral system, we will read works by Michelle Alexander and other scholars, using as our primary text Eating Behind Bars: Ending the Hidden Punishment of Food in Prisons, published by the organization Impact Justice in 2020. The audio production skills students will learn include recording, importing, mixing, editing, mastering, and exporting sound. Students will be evaluated based on their participation in class discussions, performance on a series of audio-production exercises, preparation for and completion of interviews, and production of a short podcast episode.

How will students in this course be evaluated?: Students will be evaluated based on their participation in class discussions, performance on a series of audio-production exercises, preparation for and completion of interviews, and production of a short podcast episode.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 14.  Lab fee: $20.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS."
"Probability is the branch of mathematics that deals with the likelihood of events occurring. It provides the theoretical foundation for making predictions about the behavior of random phenomena. Statistics uses this framework to analyze real-world data, make inferences, and draw conclusions. Probability theory can help us to make informed decisions whether it’s assessing risks, making choices based on potential outcomes, or understanding the likelihood of events. This course will introduce students to probability and random variables through real-world examples with an emphasis on developing probabilistic intuition through simulation. Topics covered include discrete and continuous random variables, probability spaces, densities and distributions, independence, joint and conditional distributions, expectation, and concepts including Bayes’ theorem, the central limit theorem and the law of large numbers.

This course will equip students with the tools and understanding to pursue more advanced studies in probability and related fields such as statistics and data science. Students’ learning will be assessed through weekly problem sets and take-home exams.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: Calculus 1 or equivalent (e.g. AP Calculus, IB Calculus). Students unsure if they have the right background are warmly invited to contact the instructor.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: QR."
"Bioethics studies ethical problems that occur in medical practice and the life sciences.  Contemporary bioethics is an expansive and fundamentally interdisciplinary field, but this course will consider key dilemmas in bioethics from a philosophical perspective. More specifically, we will explore how bioethical issues complicate our concepts of right and wrong, good and bad, life and death, and the human and the natural.  

We will begin with a quick overview of prominent ethical theories and we will consider the possibility of transcultural bioethics. Secondly, we will address the ethical and philosophical questions raised by the following topics: abortion, birth, population, reproduction, cloning, euthanasia and physician-assisted suicide, resource allocation and organ donation, human research ethics, genetic engineering, the doctor-patient relationship, and medical decision making. Throughout the duration of the term, we will consider how different ethical frameworks shape our assessment of contemporary moral dilemmas.

This course will introduce students to the principles of ethical thinking, familiarize students with pressing debates in bioethics, and compel students to discuss issues that are politically and socially contentious. Course requirements include engaged class participation, three short papers, a presentation, contributions to online discussion documents, and a final paper. There are no prerequisites for this course, but students should be prepared to engage complex, theoretical essays that require careful and critical reading.  

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: none.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: HS."
"This course will cover the fundamentals of computer programming, using the Python language. Students interested in obtaining basic programming skills that will prepare them to do more advanced work or learn other programming languages will benefit from this course. This course is designed for students interested in using programming in a wide range of areas, including research in the natural and social sciences, web programming and computer art. Students will learn how to develop an algorithm by breaking a problem into discrete parts, devising a solution to each part, and integrating the parts into a single solution. We will begin with basic data types, variables and expressions. We will then learn to write functions to encapsulate tasks that may be performed more than once and to understand the importance of variable scope. We will progress to looping and more advanced data structures such as lists and dictionaries. We will study how python uses objects to encapsulate data and methods that act on data. We will then learn to use existing python libraries that assist with data processing, visualization, and other tasks. The concepts of encapsulation, abstraction, and code reuse will be reinforced throughout the course. Students who complete this course will be able to write programs to automate repetitive tasks, manipulate and analyze numerical and textual data, and perform simulations. These skills will be essential for students who wish to analyze data, write computer games or cell phone apps, or create generative art. No prior programming experience is required. Students will need to use either their personal laptop or a COA loaner laptop for class and programming exercises.  Evaluation will be through class participation, quizzes, homework and a final project.

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES, QR"
"This course invites you to look at and analyze your own dreams, loves, self-doubts, interpersonal conflicts, moral beliefs, and religious practices, and those of people around you, from the perspective of unconscious passions. Drawing on the findings of classical and contemporary psychoanalysts, including Freud, Jung, Neumann, Fromm, and Kline among others, the course investigates how these thinkers/clinicians explore the unconscious mind and how it influences our beliefs, emotions, and behaviors. We will consider the ways in which these depth psychological theories and modes of self-exploration offer guidance on how to live, what to believe, and how to relate to others. Special attention is paid to the psychological mechanisms and interpretation of dreams, love, illusions, guilt, healing, identity, and reparation. Students will be evaluated on short reading responses and discussion questions, participation, a midterm interpretation of a dream and a final essay. 

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: none.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: none.  Meets the following degree requirements: none."
"This course will explore the history of public libraries, primarily in the United States, as democratic and educational institutions. Students will examine the philosophical approaches that have shaped public library services, and changes that have occurred in response to social and political movements. Different segments of the public will be explored in terms of their need for and use of the public library, including parents, youth, teachers, and elders. Students will read and discuss various claims about the current purpose of public libraries in the digital age, research library services in communities across the US and internationally, and survey their community about desired information and services at their local public library. They will then develop mission statements and service plans for public library services to meet the needs of local communities that they will present in the final class meeting. Coursework will include readings, videos, guest lectures, off-site visits, and student-led discussions.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 15. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"Consider all the ways that public speaking could be a part of your academic and professional paths: presenting your research, sitting on a webinar panel, speaking up at ACM, advocating for an urgent cause or policy, preparing your senior project presentation, delivering a formal address at a special occasion, or even deciding to perform spoken word at an open-mic. This course will prepare you to thoughtfully analyze your audience, research and organize relevant information, and deliver the critically important, well-prepared presentation that you’re capable of.  Along the way we will be guided by, and critically analyze, three varied and sometimes contradictory premises: that it’s imperative to master the art of formal, standard presentation/speech delivery, that it’s equally important to respect and refine your own unique, authentic voice and speech communication style, and that important change happens when we both listen carefully and speak up loudly.  This class will be conducted as a workshop with an emphasis on students producing increasingly advanced speeches for public performance and/or consumption. Students will complete three graded, “formal” presentations  while also considering additional creative approaches and formats for  public communication.  Students will work with a variety of short texts and videos to generate new ideas and helpful public speaking habits.  The real benefits of this course come from the positive, supportive, environment in which students can practice new public speaking skills and learn from each other.  This class emphasizes a fun, dynamic, “hands-on” approach to constructing speeches.  Students who feel that they are less proficient in the area of public communication should not be worried that this would somehow disadvantage them in terms of their overall evaluation.  All students, regardless of their levels of comfort, experience, or and English-proficiency are encouraged to consider this course.  This workshop is designed to help you improve your public presentation skills regardless of whether you are a complete novice to public speaking, or already have many years of practice. Your final evaluation for the course will be based on your engagement with the process, not on some objective standard of who gave the best speeches. 

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 14.  Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"Where do we get our history from, and who gets to tell it? In this course, we will be examining this question through LGBTQIA+ history and the practices that ensure its preservation.

Students will use primary and secondary sources about local and national Queer history to explore the interdisciplinary fields of archives, public history, and memory work and develop new knowledge of Queer history through community-based projects.

Students will reflect upon readings, engage with primary source materials, and practice hands-on technical skills such as archival appraisal, arrangement, description, and documentation. Students will have the opportunity to engage with members of the surrounding community and visit the LGBTQ+ Collection at the Jean Byers Sampson Center for Diversity in Maine at University of Southern Maine. The course culminates with a self-designed public facing project, geared towards, and available to the general public, that synthesizes technical skills, historical knowledge, and research methods into new knowledge.

Evaluation will be based on class participation, responses to assigned readings, and projects.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: $20. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"This course traces the development of “queer literature” from the 16th century to the present. We will read selected texts written in English, including poetry, drama, and novels, that involve sexual and gender identities other than straight and cisgender. Selections from queer theorists, such as Michel Foucault, Judith Butler, Eve Sedgwick, and Gloria Anzaldúa, will frame our analysis of works by writers such as Christopher Marlowe, Aphra Behn, Walt Whitman, Leslie Feinberg, Audre Lorde, and Ocean Vuong. We’ll explore what constitutes a genre of literature (specifically, queer literature) by identifying themes, tropes, and other defining characteristics. Questions we’ll address include: what makes a work of literature “queer?” Does the writing of a queer-identifying author automatically become part of this tradition? Can a piece of literature be “queer” independent of the author’s identity? How does queerness intersect with other identities, including race and socioeconomic status? What is the social and political importance of queer literature? Evaluation will be based on class participation and weekly response papers, one long paper, and one short, final paper.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: None."
"We live in a time when the struggle for economic survival is life-shortening. We live in a place where the struggles for reproductive justice, the rights of women, the rights of trans and non-binary people, and gay and lesbian freedoms are intensified and weaponized for electoral gains and political power. What are the linkages, visible or hidden, between these two phenomena? How do we bring together Marxist political economy and queer/trans-inclusive feminist analysis to diagnose them? What can the anxieties, fears, and hatreds collected at the site of (trans)genders teach us about the inner working of capitalist (re)production? In turn, how can wrestling with the racial, sexual, and environmental violence that makes contemporary capitalism possible inform our collective struggle for gender and sexual equality and justice?

In this seminar, you and I will think through these questions together through the lens of contemporary Marxist–feminist political economy. We will engage contemporary feminist, black, and queer Marxist scholars whose works illuminate the contradictory, exploitative treatment of colonialized, raced, gendered, sexualized human and non-human Others under capitalism. Topically, our focus includes the birth rate crisis and the struggle for reproductive autonomy, contemporary attacks on gender minorities, and queer and trans-centered class struggles.
This is an intensive, exploratory seminar. We will read 4-5 texts closely, focusing on each book for two weeks. In the first week, we will identify the book’s main arguments and approaches. In the second week we will re-read the book along with key texts that inform, supplement, or challenge its author(s). Our selection of key texts may include Jenny Brown’s Birth Strike, and Jules Gleeson and Elle O’Rouke (eds.) Transgender Marxism, but there are rooms to replace them with texts that better reflect your interests. You don’t have to be an expert on the debates and issues we engage in, but you must be unafraid and willing to actively grapple with them both intellectually and ethically.

The course is intended for students who are interested in approaching contemporary debates about LGBT+ issues, women’s rights, and reproductive justice from a radical, intersectional, and anti-capitalist perspective. It is also valuable for students who want to understand what makes capitalism possible and what may un-make it. You will get the most out of this seminar if you have a working knowledge of the political economy of capitalism, feminist theory, and/or critical social theory. Students will be evaluated through bi-weekly reading reviews and a final project or essay.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: (1) One or more courses in political economy or social theory; and (2) One or more courses in gender/sexuality studies. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS."
"This readings seminar will explore the history of race thinking and structural forms of power in America from the earliest settlement of the hemisphere by Europeans to the twentieth century. We will emphasize the specific mechanisms of power used to produce and reproduce the ideas and institutions that oppressed African Americans, Native Americans, and ""ethnics"" over the course of the country’s history. As a nation built on slavery, racial discrimination, and white supremacy, the United States provides a unique vantage point from which to examine the workings out of the strange ideologies of difference that took root in the New World. The class will explore a wide range of histories from the origins of slavery in the seventeenth century as a solution to the ""the problem of the poor"" to the inclusion of Irish, Jewish and others in the category of ""White"" in the twentieth. A key aspect of the course will be examining the construction and workings of Whiteness. The seminar will be based on discussion of key texts in the scholarship of race and racism in the United States, and students will lead those discussions. Other core work of the class will be mastering the complex arguments and evidence used to reveal the inner workings of white supremacy through readings, analytic writing, and an independent project. The course is intended for a wide range of students willing to dig in to the work of reading extensively about a contentious topic to form their own historical analysis of the past. Evaluation will be based on discussion, mastery of the readings, short analytic writing, and a final project.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate.  Prerequisites: None.  Lab fee: None.  Class limit: 15.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS, HY"
"The spectacular range of habitats between the Pacific Ocean and the Great Basin and Sonoran Deserts has generated some of the most significant ""place based"" writing within American literature. In this intensive field-based course students will be required to read a range of materials dealing with key places. people, and events in the western landscape during the summer prior to the formal start of the course. The class will then convene in California and begin a trek eastwards into the Great Basin Desert, south to the Carson/Iceberg Wilderness, Yosemite, the Hetch Hetchy Valley and Mono Lake, and then finally southeastward across the Sonoran desert to Albuquerque, New Mexico, where students and faculty will participate in a conference celebrating the first 50 years of the Wilderness Act. Readings will include work by Muir, Didion, Steinbeck, and Fremont. Evaluation will consist of class participation, a series of essays and journal essays, and a final term paper that will be completed following the end of the field portion of the course.  This course will be integrated with and requires co-enrollment in Ecology and Natural History of the American West, and Wilderness in the West.

Level:  Intermediate/Advanced.  Prerequisites: Permission of instructor; camping/backpacking ability.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $1,500.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"This is an intermediate/advanced reading seminar focused on contemporary, experimental, and speculative political ecologies. Readings will include books, dissertation manuscripts, and scholarly articles. The course is designed to allow students to explore intersections between their own individual and collective intellectual interests and endeavors and political ecologies. The course will be a collective intellectual endeavor conducted through conversation and written reflections, including through regular interaction on an online blog. Evaluation will be based on participation in real-time and blog conversations, including twice-weekly reflective blog postings; leading several class discussions; and a final synthetic essay on a topic of their choosing.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: None.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"Reconsidering the Trivial will contextualize the work and the working approach of artists Pieter Bruegel the Elder (1525-1569), Artemisia Gentileschi (1593-1653), Ana Mendieta (1948-1985), Mark Bradford (1961*), and their contemporaries. The goal of this studio art course is to explore more advanced problems in the production process of art, with emphasis on the complexity of ""everyday life"" and with a special focus on class, gender, and race. Thematic assignments are designed to have students create and critique work on an intermediate to advanced level. Using their independent work as a starting point, students will have to develop projects in response to texts, films and artworks discussed in class. One collaborative presentation on an assigned artist will be required. Student evaluation is based on participation in class discussions, competition of projects, and artist presentation.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced.  Prerequisites: Introductory level ADS course and permission of instructor.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $20.  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS"
"In 1924, the famous architect Le Corbusier claimed that “architecture is a machine for living in,” a statement that influenced Twentieth Century architectural theory and practice more than any other, calling upon the designer of the built environment to embrace the industrial era. One hundred years later we live with the devastating social and environmental consequences of a paradigm of industrial extraction as the basis for building our communities and cities.

In this 2-credit course students will explore regrowth architecture as an alternative, life-affirming paradigm for building, one focused on design approaches that involve (1) radical improvements in the environmental conditions of our communities and cities; (2) dramatic expansion in the use of biomaterials and living systems in a post carbon age; and (3) tangible responses to environmental and climate injustices. Through a combination of testing out design ideas on an actual site and exploring current literature on regenerative, ecological, systems-based, and sustainable design, the class will collectively build a better understanding of what regrowth architecture might look like.

As we move back and forth between the theory and practice sections of this 2-credit course, we will come to recognize how the act of drawing is a form of theorizing and theory as a foundation from which to draw. To this end, in order to succeed in this class, a basic level of drawing skill is necessary.

Evaluations will be based on participation and sustained engagement with the core course themes and commitment to an iterative process involving succinct compositions of written narratives and visual representations of the ideas and systems we will be examining. Above all, the studio requires initiative and engagement as we transition from a highly facilitated framework at the beginning of the term (topics, resources and methods that the instructor choreographs) to more independent and applied research given the “life” that project-based work acquires as the term progresses.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: Basic level drawing skills.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS."
"This course will examine bias directed at religions in the contemporary United States.  In this course we will examine our own religious identities as well as the stereotypes we have about religions.  We will also probe the level and impact of bias toward a number of religions in the US, including Jehovah’s Witnesses, members of the Church of the Latter Day Saints, Catholics, members of new religious movements, Jews and Muslims.  This course will address timely and controversial issues including the relationship between religion and laws and policies affecting the LGBTQ population, immigration and terrorism.  Finally, conflict resolution efforts both in Kosovo, aimed at resolving tensions and violence between Albanian Muslims and Serbian Orthodox Christians, and in Northern Ireland, addressing animosity and violence between Catholics and Protestants, will prompt a discussion of approaches for reducing anti-religious bias.  Students will be evaluated on 3 papers (a paper on each student's religious or non-religious identity, a research paper on a topic chosen by each student and an opinion editorial), class discussion and short written assignments relating to the readings for the course.  

Level:  Introductory/Intermediate.  Prerequisites: none.  Class limit:  15. Lab fee: none. Meets the following degree requirements: none."
"There is something compelling about islands, especially remote oceanic specks of land hundreds of miles from a continent. How was the island created? What flora and fauna are found there? Are there humans?  How did they arrive and who discovered this oceanic speck? For over five hundred years explorers and settlers have engaged with the distant islands of the Atlantic for landmarks, for resources, for adventure, and, in some cases to create homes. This course will explore these questions, setting the human element in a geo-political context with reference to discovery and settlement. From the Falklands and South Georgia in the south, we’ll move northeast to the mid-Atlantic Ridge to examine Tristan da Cunha, St. Helena and Ascension. Each of these islands have played important roles in human history, and they also host some of the most remarkable populations of seabirds in the world. North of the equator, we’ll journey to Cape Verde, the Canaries, the Azores, on to Iceland, Greenland and Svalbard. The role of these islands in global conservation and the growth of eco-tourism will be examined. Once we have familiarized ourselves with aspects of remote island ecology and history, we will use this lens to briefly examine more familiar coastal islands such as Manhattan or the British isles. The class will be taught in a lecture and discussion format and students will be assessed on the basis of two papers, one at midterm, and one as a final,  and occasional quizzes.

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: None."
"We face many day-to-day issues, such as climate change, discrimination, economic challenges, and an increase in disinformation. To solve these problems, we typically address flawed policies and practices. However, what is often overlooked is the role that writing and language play in maintaining—but also transforming—these structures. How do writing and language intersect with social (in)justice? And why does this matter to us as we try to solve social issues?

In this class, we will examine how social issues intersect with writing and you will develop an understanding of the role of language and discourse in social life. Topics include—but are not limited to— language and discrimination, language and gender, and diversity in language. To learn more about different social issues, we will conduct research, analyze discourse, and engage critically with information. While information is readily available, there has also been a significant growth in disinformation. How and where can we find trustworthy information about a social issue in an ocean of (dis)information? This course will help you refine your research practices and you will learn how to navigate and evaluate information.

For this course, a basic understanding of citation practices, how to navigate style guides, and an interest in analyzing discourse will be beneficial. Class activities are discussion-based and guided by readings on topics related to linguistics and discourse. You will participate in hands-on activities to sharpen your research skills and ability to locate and evaluate information. You will also be introduced to the basics of discourse analysis. Assignments are based on research on a social issue that matters to you. In-class activities and assignments are used to assess your learning, research practices, and understanding of the role that writing and language play in maintaining social (in)justice.

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS, W."
"In this course we seek to understand the current situation of Ladakh and Ladakhi people, beginning with the ecological farming systems that have sustained their communities in the desert Himalayas for thousands of years.
—-

Ladakh is a dry glacial-fed land of vast mountains, steep valleys, passes, and high-altitude plains. Ladakhis are mostly a mix of Tibetan Buddhists and Muslims who speak a common Ladakhi language. A part of India since 1947, Ladakh is a part of the ancient Central Asian silk route and borders Tibet and Pakistan.

Beginning with the case study of the small village of Tar in western Ladakh, students will have the opportunity to explore the intricate practices of agriculture and culture that have allowed Ladakhi people to live in a genuinely sustainable relationship with their place for thousands of years.

Now as new technologies rapidly become available, all of the generations are deciding what practices and lifeways to keep, what to change, and what to abandon. At the same time, with increased access, wealthy interests and extractive industries are starting to exploit Ladakh for profit. Presently Ladakhis are making a political stand, seeking protections for their lands, waters, communities, and culture.

Using first-hand stories, images, texts, video, and current media, this class will seek a human ecological understanding of traditional Ladakhi lifeways and the current choices Ladakhis face, as well as the efforts of this indigenous community for sovereignty and self-determination.

This class is intended for, but not limited to, students interested in studying and working in Ladakh in the future. Students with a firm intention to travel will have the option to focus more intensively on language study. Those with an interest in ecological agricultural systems, questions of sustainable development, and indigenous resistance movements may also benefit from this class.

Students will be evaluated on written assignments, participation in seminar discussions, weekly quizzes for students on a language-intensive track, and a final presentation of an independent research project.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class Limit: 12. Lab Fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"The Society for Ecological Restoration defines ecological restoration as “the process of assisting the recovery of an ecosystem that has been degraded, damaged, or destroyed.” In this era of widespread environmental degradation, restoration ecology provides an important set of methods for mitigating anthropogenic damage. However, the science of restoration is still in its early phases, and important theoretical and practical questions remain to be resolved. This class will critically examine the assumptions that underlie restoration planning, both in the ethical dimension and in the realm of scientific theory. We will consider the validity of conceptual models of ecological communities and ecosystems and the way that these models shape decision-making. We will survey the factors that must be taken into account during restoration and study best-practices approaches, with a focus on adaptive management. In the final project, groups of students will develop and present restoration plans for a local site. Students will be evaluated based on two essays, class participation, and the final project.

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisites: Any of a number of courses including Biology: Form and Function, Trees and Shrubs, Ecology, Weed Ecology, or Landscape Architecture Design Studio.  Class limit: 20.  Lab fee: none.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES"
"How do ""philosophies born of struggle"" (Leonard Harris) change, disrupt, and advance the discipline of philosophy? Academic philosophers have historically studied a select group of thinkers, most of whom are white men from Europe. European philosophers offer wonderfully rich arguments, but like all perspectives, theirs are partial and limited. To explore foundational philosophical questions, this course will read canonical European philosophers alongside scholars who engage with this canon from a diverse set of cultural, political, and historical contexts, such as indigenous studies, Africana philosophy, Latin American philosophy, postcolonial studies, and feminist theory. Along the way, we will read essays that analyze the concept of “the canon,” and we will consider how different theoretical interventions advance the discipline of philosophy.

To rethink the canon, this course will center on four philosophical questions: 1) What is the self or subjectivity? 2) What is the relationship between self and other? 3) What makes someone a good or virtuous person? 4) How do different linguistic forms (propositional, poetic, narrative) shape our thinking about reality and relationships? For each set of questions, we will pair texts from different historical and cultural contexts. Possible philosophers include Gloria Anzaldúa, Charles Mills, W.E.B Du Bois, Henry Odera Oruka, Kwasi Wiredu, Ofelia Schutte, René Descartes, Kris Sealey, Alain LeRoy Locke, David Hume, Immanuel Kant, Frantz Fanon, Maria Lugones, Plato, John Locke, Brian Yazzie Burkhart, Friedrich Nietzsche, Simone de Beauvoir, Winona LaDuke, Judith Butler, Kwame Gyekye, Jean Paul Sartre, Oyèrónké Oyèwùmí, and Kathryn Sophia Belle. Course requirements include four 3-page papers, a presentation, and a final paper.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisite: Prior work in philosophy will be helpful, but not required. Class limit: 15. Lab Fee: $20. Meets the following degree requirements: HS."
"Does nature have rights? There is a growing global movement answering that question in the affirmative. But what does that mean and how does it function in legal and political systems? The Rights of Nature (RoN) movement(s) has the potential to revolutionize environmental law and our relationship to the planet. Many believe that existing environmental law is inadequate to solve the critical problems of climate change, habitat loss, and mass extinction. The RoN movement proposes strategies that include granting rights to nature through legal personhood and assigning property rights to rivers, culturally important plants, specific animals, and wildlife. The course explores both the promise and perils of this approach while also exploring the field’s multifarious origins, including Indigenous Law. By examining the concepts of rights, constitutionalism, standing, human rights law, and eco-centric law, students will gain an understanding of the context of the RoN movement. Although a powerful rhetorical concept, implementation of RoN as a legal strategy has been challenging and has met with mixed success. Fundamental questions of “who speaks for the trees” and what obligations are conferred when rights are granted are slowly being worked out in courts and national legislatures. These questions are particularly challenging where Western and Indigenous worldviews come together. Fundamentally, this seminar will explore what it takes to recognize the inherent rights of the natural world to “exist, thrive, and evolve.” Students will be evaluated through several written assignments, class presentations, and active and meaningful participation in seminar discussions. Students will be asked to engage in a term-long research project that examines a specific RoN case study. 

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: Environmental Law & Policy OR Advanced International Environmental Law Seminar OR Indigenous America. Class limit: 16.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS."
"In this course, students will learn to identify ~70 common rocks and minerals in hand sample, and a few common minerals in thin section. Building on their ability to identify minerals, students will learn to properly classify igneous, sedimentary, and metamorphic rocks using standard classification methods. Beyond learning about igneous, sedimentary, and metamorphic rock-forming environments, we will cover topics such as plate tectonics, geologic time, basic petrology and mineralogy, tools and instruments used for chemical and physical analysis, and natural resources related to rocks and minerals. By the end of the term, students will be able to relate a rock to its environment of formation, identify common rocks and minerals in hand sample, and relate the types and spatial distribution of rocks and minerals to the geologic history of Mt. Desert Island and Maine. The course will include weekly readings from mineralogy and petrology textbooks and web-resources. Students will complete a rock/mineral lab each week and quizzes every other week. We will visit a few local field sites and as well as conduct one weekend-long collecting trip to sites throughout Maine. The students will be evaluated based on their performance on the weekly labs and quizzes, the completeness and accuracy of their collection, and a final project on the rocks and minerals of one select MDI field site. The course fee covers the cost of a weekend collecting field trip, and some field and lab supplies. 

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: none.  Class limit: 16.  Lab fee: $100.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES"
"Scholar Isaiah Berlin considered Romanticism to be “the greatest single shift in the consciousness of the West.” This advanced course will consider the diverse body of Romantic Art through thematic enquiry, case studies, critical and historical analysis. Divergent aesthetic ideologies in Romantic Art will be examined in relationship to both major trends and minor currents of intellectual thought during the period 1780-1840 in Europe, with an emphasis placed largely on German Romanticism. Taken together, many of the literary and philosophical texts associated with the movement have been understood as fundamental critiques of rationality; however, it is the less celebrated illustrations found in scientific treatises and works of art not acknowledged in the canon of the visual arts, as well as images embedded in various forms of printed matter, which effectually capsize Enlightenment aesthetic theories and provide impetus to the development of Realism. Although the body of scholarly work that studies the interstices of Romantic art, literature, and music is enormous, the course will narrow the scope by focusing on certain works as sites of a particular pictorial kind of representational transdisciplinarity. The course proposes that the widespread interconnectedness within the fine and popular arts, through aesthetic and material production, inform the conceptualization of Romantic imagery. Excellent evaluations will based on a high level of class participation, a consistent demonstration of the close reading of assigned texts, and a commitment to generous listening during group discussions - along with timely submission of two short essays and a final research paper.

Level:  Advanced.  Prerequisites:  A minimum of one history, anthropology, or literature course and permission of instructor.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $30.  Meets the following degree requirements:  AD, HY"
"Throughout history, music has played an important role in various cultures and in the case of Mesoamerica it was no different, since it is known that since pre-Columbian times, various peoples of what is now Mexico had a great variety of musical instruments that accompanied their religious life, festivities and dances. With the passage of time and from the conquest, music began to take on different nuances and began to diversify thanks to the incursion of a variety of new musical instruments that arrived with the Spanish as well as the new rhythms contributed by the African population that arrived during the colonization and that today form an important part of the culture of our Afro-Mexican communities, thus enriching our ethnic diversity and sound. Today Mesoamerican cultures continue to express their worldview through their sacred music, accompanying songs and dances with melodies that carry an inevitable syncretism and musical reinterpretation, thus achieving an extension of their sound culture through time. For this reason, this course aims for the student to have an approach to the main musical manifestations of Mexico, highlighting its cultural importance for current communities, as well as knowing the contemporary rhythms that in some way influence the construction of their cultural identity and ethnic recognition through music.  The course is designed as an immersive experience  in Spanish language and Latin American culture to help further the proficiency of those students who already have an intermediate, advanced or native level fluency in the language. All aspects of the course, including submitted assignments, will be conducted in Spanish. For each session, the student will have to carry out short investigations and readings related to the topics explored in student led discussions. Said readings will be accompanied by audio and / or audiovisual material that they should listen to and / or watch before each session. As a final product, the students must carry out an essay related to some theme of the course or, if they prefer, with some rhythm or musical style related to their own culture.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: Intermediate level of Spanish language competence. Class Limit: 15. Lab Fee: None."
"Samba is one of music’s great spectacles – loud, coordinated, precise, and kinetic. The music is equally at home on the stage and in the street. All are welcome to participate in COA’s samba percussion ensemble. The individual percussion parts range in complexity so the music suits a wide range of skills and levels of experience. The musical repertoire for the ensemble will be developed in coordination with Caique Vidal, a Brazilian percussionist who will visit the class (virtually) on a few occasions to offer perspective and insights drawn from his experience with the music. Alongside rehearsal and performance, students will study the history of samba music in Brazil. We will read Barbara Browning’s Samba: Resistance in Motion and also discuss what the music’s recontextualization to a college campus in Maine might mean for its performers and listeners. Student assessment will be based on rehearsal attendance, class discussion participation, reading response journals, and a final group presentation.

Level: Variable, Introductory through Advanced. Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 12.  Lab Fee: $60. Meets the following degree requirements: ADS"
"This course will examine the figure of Satan in literary and scriptural texts with particular reference to contemporary political violence and the 2022 attack on Salman Rushdie. We will look back at the evolutionary origins of good and evil, then track the political uses of demonization and apocalyptic language in contemporary news media as we approach the November election. Readings will include Sharon Olds’ poem “Satan Says,” selections from the Old Testament and the Koran, Euripides’ The Bacchae, Milton’s Paradise Lost, Hawthorne’s The Scarlet Letter, Arthur Miller’s The Crucible, and a close reading of Rushdie’s novel, The Satanic Verses. We will also have a weekly film series including “The Seventh Seal.” “The Crucible,” “The Exorcist,” “Angel Heart,” “Barton Fink,”  “Under the Sun of Satan,” “Rosemary’s Baby.” and “Antichrist.” Updated film suggestions are welcome. Student reports could extend the class into areas of art history, Tarot, witchcraft, Tantric Buddhism, Pizzagate and other Satanic accusations, and freedom of expression versus cultural sensitivity. Evaluations will be based on midterm and term papers and in-class reports.

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 15. Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"This course will introduce students to the fundamentals of painting, such as composition, light, and color. Students will learn about material and the technical matters of painting. Students will work with oil based paint, experiment with water based alternatives to acrylic mediums and learn to prepare their own canvases. Besides creating individual paintings, students will collectively work on large-scale canvases. This course will develop from individual representational set-ups towards collective, abstract work. Regular class critiques will assist in examining formal composition principles. While we will discuss historic work examples from a post-colonial perspective, the course will focus on the work of contemporary non-western artists. Readings and artist presentations will be assigned. Assignments require students to work independently outside of class. Evaluation will be based on painting projects, participation in class discussions, critiques and artist presentation. 

Level: Introductory/Intermediate.  Prerequisites: Drawing I or permission of instructor based on portfolio review of independent work.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $120.  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS"
"This class will offer the student a chance to learn the history and repertoire of American Music Theater. We will assign and direct students in scenes and songs from the classics of Broadway Musicals and explore some new works as well. The course will focus on duets but may include some solo songs and/or larger ensemble numbers. Evaluation will be based on the successful rehearsal process and performance of three different scenes/monologues and songs.  Students will be required to read the entire works that songs and scenes are culled from and clearly demonstrate an understanding of the full text and its historical significance. Students will also be required to keep a performance work log that includes all notes given in class and the response/plan of action to the notes.

Level: Introductory.   Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 10.  Lab fee: 50."
"This course provides an introduction to how science has been, and can be, visualized. It is a multidisciplinary course in being informed by the history and philosophy of science, neuroscience, and different theories associated with cognition, pedagogy, communication, design and art, as well as ideas about the democratization of science and science communication through both actor-network theory/controversy mapping and co-creation/participatory practice. Throughout, we will combine theory with critical and creative practice. Students will engage with the primary literature as well as online multi-media. Students will have hands-on exercises with specific approaches like infographics and data visualization, as well as tackle transmedia approaches for constructing distributed science narratives. The final project work will investigate ways to graphically represent the complexity of interactions within an issue of science in society.

Evaluations will be based on three components: a series of practical visualization exercises (collectively worth 40% of final grade); reflective engagement with assigned readings and multimedia material (35%); and an individual transmedia project that maps the components and interactions of a contemporary science in society issue (25%). This course will be of interest to a diversity of students, including those interested in communicating science to the public, those interested in issues of science in society, and those interested in visual design and sci-art. 

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: Permission of Instructor. Class Limit: 8. Lab fee: None."
"This course is designed to prepare those who are intending to meet the learning needs of diverse populations of students in grades 7-12 or late adolescent young adults in other learning environments. It is an objective of the course to communicate that teaching is intellectual work, that it requires a dedication to and a love of subject matter, a respect and caring for students, a concern for equity, and a moral imperative for excellence in teaching. Students spend 70 hours with their target population and curriculum, as well as consulting with content faculty. (Some of these hours may be reserved for fall term.) These learning-teaching experiences are integrated into class discussion where students analyze the elements needed for successful teaching, learning, and assessing in their own content area and across disciplines. The purposes, problems, opportunities, issues, strategies, and materials involved in teaching diverse adolescent and young adult learners will be examined critically, and students will be evaluated through class discussions, individual and group work, reflections on field experiences, and peer and virtual teaching and assessing.
 
Level:  Advanced.  Prerequisites: Permission of instructor. Class limit: 12. Lab Fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: ED"
"Over 90% of today’s terrestrial flora are seed plants and provide the majority of the ecological energy across the world. Today the majority of the human population is dependent on the energy and nutrients stored in the seed of a remarkably few crops that arose through the breeding and saving of seeds. Today this critical interdependence is rich with questions and at are at the center of the food security and food sovereignty debates. Some questions of this human-plant co-evolutionary story to be addressed in this course are: How is crop breeding done in different parts of the world? What are the techniques for breeding, seed saving, and storage? What traits are selected for in traditional and modern breeding? What role do seed banks and libraries play in our common future? What are the current laws governing seed quality and ownership? How do these laws and treaties structure corporate consolidation, community initiatives, and possible mechanisms for developing crops in the face of global climate change? What is the “free the seed movement” and why might it be important? The second major debate to be explored will be the ethical and ecological implications of the “assisted migration” of wild plants as a means of conservation and adaptation to global climate change and the replacement of horticultural materials with wild plants as means for expanding native habitat corridors. We will contextualize these two major themes with an in-depth look into the biology of seeds as well as the ecological and evolutionary significance of seeds. In preparation for required attendance at the Organic Seed Alliance conference, laboratory exercises will cover seed dormancy and germination, and build skills in hand pollination and trait selection. Evaluation will be based on class participation, leadership in seminar discussions, quizzes, a group report on the Organic Seed Alliance Conference, and the development of a final project based on one or both of themes in the course.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced.  Prerequisites: Strong understanding of botany (at least two botany courses); one course with an introduction to some kind of policy strongly recommended;  permission of instructor.  Class limit: 10.  Lab fee: $120.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES"
"This course experiments hands-on in understanding ecology through integrated art-science practice. We use a transdisciplinary approach (in questioning, observing, documenting, interpreting and hypothesising) to develop a reflective practice for considering ecological interactions and biological processes. From visualising relationships and ‘drawing to know’, to multi-sensory pattern recognition, we explore how arts practice can help inform scientific inquiry. 

The first 7 weeks of the course involve readings (from historic, such as Goethe, to contemporary, like Gemma Anderson), lectures, class discussion and practical exercises in a diverse set of creative methods for inquiry. These exercises include time outside each week producing work for a field book (a combined sketchbook, observation notebook and reflective practice journal etc). Later in the course each student then focuses more intensively on 1-2 methods of inquiry in a final study of their own devising. 

Evaluation will be based on successful completion of 3 course components: (1) reflective interaction and discussion of assigned readings; (2) weekly exercises and work in a field notebook; and (3) a final study that develops a particular vein of creative questioning and observation about ecological interaction. These can involve diverse methods (from painting to print, video, animation, and sound recordings, to sculpture, dance and other mixed-media… but the final work will be encapsulated in a format for sharing with an external audience.

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: None; no science or arts experience or skills required.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $35 which goes toward a starter kit of required art materials. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"Through guest speakers, readings, and lectures, this course will introduce a wide variety of chemistry research topics including: environmental chemistry (topics likely focus on: persistent organic pollutants), chemistry education (topics likely focus on: teaching sustainable chemistry), materials chemistry (topics likely focus on: solid state batteries, fuel cells and photovoltaics), organic chemistry (topics likely focus on: novel chemical transformations), biochemistry, and the chemical origins of life (topics likely focus prebiotic chemical metabolism). The course will focus on how to read and write scientific manuscripts, how to follow a scientific talk, and how to present research to a variety of audiences. Students in the course will work closely with guest speakers to develop their own research questions and set up their own experiments. Students will be evaluated on participation, a research proposal, a draft manuscript, a poster presentation, and an oral presentation.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: Permission of Instructor. Class limit: 13. Lab fee: $100. Meets the following degree requirements: ES."
"This seminar traces the historical development of human ecology.  We begin by reviewing the seminal works in human ecology, the contributions from biology, and the development of human ecology as a multidisciplinary concept.  Along these lines we compare the various brands of human ecology that have developed through sociology (the Chicago school), anthropology and cultural ecology, ecological psychology, and economics, as well as human ecological themes in the humanities, architecture, design, and planning.  This background is then used to compare the COA brand of Human Ecology with other programs in this country and elsewhere around the world.  Our final purpose is to look at new ideas coming from philosophy, the humanities, biological ecology, and other areas for future possibilities for human ecology.  Evaluations are based on presentations and papers. Offered every other year

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: $25. Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"Robots and microcontrollers are devices that autonomously perform repetitive tasks which are becoming an increasingly common part of our lives. The “internet of things” is all around us, in watches, glasses, refrigerators and radios. How do these devices work? How do they sense the world around them and how do they respond to it? How can you make your own devices? In this course, we will learn to build and program simple but useful devices. We will begin by creating devices that perform simple tasks and move on to using devices that sense and respond to their environment. Examples might include temperature or gas sensors that sound an alarm when levels are too high. We will then move on to build and program devices that collect and store data, such as a weather station or a motion-activated camera. We will discuss more complex topics such as sensing and manipulating the external world and will construct automated robots that can carry out simple tasks. Students who are interested in learning about electronic hardware and software, deploying remote sensors or controlling robots will benefit from this course. Previous programming experience will be helpful for more advanced projects, but is not required for this course. We will use devices such as Arduinos, Raspberry Pis or other devices. Evaluation will be through quizzes, homework and projects.

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: Permission of instructor.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: $100.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES, QR."
"“For him it meant that everything which existed was interconnected: the trees, the sky, the weather, people, poetry, science, nature. He hunted down facts in the way a magpie collects shiny things. Yet when he strung them all together, somehow they did become stories — of a kind.”
-Amitav Ghosh, The Hungry Tide

Amitav Ghosh uses the words above to describe one of his characters, but the same words could be used for him. A prominent postcolonial writer in English with a background in social anthropology, Amitav Ghosh has long written about the world's interconnectedness in both his fiction and nonfiction. His works are not just stories but reflections on how the past shapes the present and the future and how memories of the past, long forgotten, can teach us how to deal with the issues that plague us now, like climate change.

This course, then, will be a deep dive into his magnum opus, the Ibis trilogy: The Sea of Poppies (2008), The River of Smoke (2011), and The Flood of Fire (2015).  As we set sail on the Indian Ocean, journeying alongside the crew of Ibis, we will explore the intricate web of connections brought forward by the themes of subalternity, colonialization, trade, wars, and the environment. While our focus will be on the novels, we will also look at some of the author’s nonfictional work, like Smoke and Ashes: Opium’s Hidden Histories (2023), which will provide an understanding of the context but also the depth of his research that culminated into three key pieces of literature.

This will be a reading-intensive class appropriate for students interested in fiction, history, and languages (some languages that appear are Bengali, Hindi, Bhojpuri, Persian, Cantonese, Chinese Pidgin, and Mauritian Creole). A background in literary/critical theory and familiarity with Ghosh’s other works will be helpful, though not required. You will be evaluated through class discussions and written assignments such as short responses, an oral presentation, a 10-12 page critical analysis paper, and a multimodal project.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 15. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: HS."
"This course offers an overview of feminist, trans, and queer theories. The purpose of this course is two-fold. First, it will provide a snapshot of the ideas, traditions, and debates that shape these traditions. Second, this course will teach students to critically interrogate the meaning of sex, gender, sexuality, power, and oppression. Along the way, we will consider a host of arguments regarding the sources of sexism, racism, transphobia, and heteronormativity, debates regarding language and reality, the relationship between subjectivity and oppression, and the benefits and downfalls of identity politics. Although this course will stress the many ways feminist theory, trans theory, and queer theory overlap, we will also consider the emergence and development of queer and trans philosophies as distinct and unique disciplines.  

Some of the principal questions for this course include: Which categories are used to study the human being and when are these categories oppressive or problematic? How do the categories of identity and difference inform our understanding of human experiences? When is language a mechanism for social and political oppression and when does language facilitate liberation? How do multicultural, intersectional, transgender, and queer approaches inform and transform feminist politics? How do queer philosophers challenge the theoretical orthodoxies of identity, gender, and sexuality? Course requirements include weekly writing assignments, class participation, a midterm exam, and a final paper. This will be a discussion-driven course and students should be prepared to engage and discuss challenging theoretical literature. 

Level: Introductory/Intermediate.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: HS."
"In this studio course, students will explore various aspects of composition in two-dimensional media primarily through the language of collage. The exercises in this class include “transcribing” other artists’ work to try to understand why certain images have an impact on us or function the way they do, and then use these insights in the creation of new work; making work iteratively (how does varying a single element change a piece?); and exploring different ways of translating abstract ideas into two-dimensional work. Students will be introduced to different theories of color and through exercises explore how an observed or mixed spot of color can be thought of as having hue (where it sits on the color wheel), value (how light or dark it is) and chroma (how saturated it is); how colors interact with each other; and consider the limitations of such systems. Students will be working with line, color and shape, from imagination as well as from observation–of still life setups (including assemblages that they make themselves) and models. Evaluation will be based on the completion of assignments and exercises in a way that demonstrates an understanding of the ideas introduced in the class, engagement with the course materials, the ability to provide feedback and the ability to respond to feedback in one’s work.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: none.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $90.  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS."
"Sheep play profoundly important roles in human societies. This course is a human ecological exploration of sheep and wool, combined with a hands-on component in which we will work with sheep and learn fiber arts. This class will meet for one studio session and two lecture/discussion sections per week, plus at least one Saturday field trip. In the studio sessions, we will study sheep husbandry through visits to Peggy Rockefeller Farm, and learn a variety of techniques for working with wool, from the preparation (shearing, washing, and carding) to spinning and working with yarn (including knitting, crochet, and weaving). The lecture/discussion sessions will cover topics such as the ecological impacts of sheep in different parts of the world, the physics of spinning and the chemistry of dyes, and the symbolism of sheep in the mythology of different cultures. The course will draw on a wide range of material and intellectual approaches, with sheep and wool as the unifying theme. Students will be evaluated based on participation, short written assignments, and a final oral presentation. 

No prior knowledge of fiber craft is necessary, but students who come in knowing one of the basic techniques may be able to explore advanced techniques like lacework or design in three dimensions. Students should meet with the instructor before spring break to discuss goals and equipment needs for the studio sessions. Some basic supplies will be provided, but students should plan to purchase additional equipment such as knitting needles depending on the projects that they choose.

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisites: Permission of instructor.  Class limit: 10.  Lab fee: $100. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"Heaps accumulate behind the studio: broken flowerpots, mugs, and tchotchkes. Through this ceramic sculpture seminar, students will consider the lifecycle of clay– from slip to stoneware. In an age of mass-production, what meanings do we pull from the shard pile? Students in this course will make, unmake, and remake, iterative ceramic artworks while experimenting with ceramics repurposing methods such as mosaic, clay recycling, and re-firing found ceramic. Artists such as Phoebe Cummings, Nicole Seisler, and Sterling Ruby will guide our discourse as reclaim and remnants become conceptual material for sculptural practice. Students will be evaluated based on their participation in class discussions and critiques, as well as their inventiveness and demonstrated effort in ceramic assignments. Students should have taken a previous college level course in ceramics or have equivalent experience. If you are unsure about your prior work, please contact the instructor directly. 

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: A college level course in ceramics or have equivalent experience. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: $140.  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS"
"The course provides students with skills and strategies for conflict resolution and advocacy on human rights and social justice issues. Students will practice leading focus groups, facilitating conflict resolution dialogues, conducting workshops and developing workshop agendas and curricula. Students will also explore strategies for effective advocacy by examining case studies from the instructor’s work on human rights and social justice issues in Europe and the USA and from the work of other advocates. Advocates from Europe or the USA will present either in person or by Skype. Students may be able to observe active conflict resolution or advocacy projects in Maine during the term. Students will be evaluated on their work during practice sessions on conflict resolution and on other skills relating to advocacy on human rights issues, their written analysis of case studies,
their final project and their participation in class discussion.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced.  Prerequisites: Coursework addressing conflict resolution or social justice advocacy, or significant experience in working on social justice and human rights issues recommended.  Class limit: 11.  Lab fee: $25. Meets the following degree requirement: HS"
"Social media is an aspect of modern life that has become ubiquitous. It is difficult to meet someone and part ways without asking for how to keep in touch with them. Instagram, TikTok, SnapChat, Discord? What is it that you spend your time on and why? Have you met all the people you’re connected with? What do you share? What do you view? Why do we connect? A lot comes with these connections. Good things – like the ability to instantly connect not only with your friends, but also thousands or hundreds of thousands of followers worldwide; the ability to see news and search for information in any language anywhere and at any time of day; movies, books, and music; and the ability to share your views and voice with others without having to pay for any of it. And other things too … there are many costs associated with social media use, and many feel that regular breaks or even complete ruptures from social media are necessary, whereas others feel that they could never let it go. In this class we will examine our own use of social media, learn ways to understand how and when it is harmful or helpful to mental health and other aspects of daily life, and how to do research on this important topic. 

Students will gain a general understanding of how to approach psychological questions using the methods of scientific psychology, as well as learn about basic concepts in social, personality, developmental, and cognitive psychology.

Students will be evaluated based on attendance, in-class participation, reading responses, and a final research paper that proposes a research study or is a detailed literature review on social media and its effects.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 16.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS."
"This course introduces students to the process of designing social science research, focusing specifically on developing research questions, selecting suitable methods, and designing the research plan. The social sciences have a long history of debates over the value of qualitative versus quantitative research; operating from the position that research questions should drive methods selection, this course covers a range of qualitative and quantitative approaches. Topics covered include: the link between theory and the development of research objectives, questions, variables, measures, and hypotheses; research design and threats to validity; systematic data collection procedures including surveys, semi-structured and structured interviews, participant observation, and cognitive methods; mixed-methods and exploratory versus explanatory approaches; probability and non-probability sampling; data management; numerical, text, and narrative data analysis; and proposal design. Students are evaluated based on class participation, fieldwork and field notes, and a final research proposal that integrates and applies the methods and concepts covered in the course. This course is of particular value for third and fourth year students preparing for their senior projects. 

Level: Advanced.  Prerequisites: Permission of instructor and at least two social science courses such as anthropology, economics, media studies, political science, psychology, or related fields.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $40.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"We live in a world of problems . . . global warming, inequality, discrimination, child labor, slavery, waste, species extinction, domestic violence and a myriad of other issues occupy the headlines, courses and can feel overwhelming at times. Unfortunately, we rarely here about solutions, let alone have the opportunity to create our own solutions for the issues that concern us and inspire us to action.
 
Changing the world takes more than a critical eye for what is wrong, proselytizing a good idea and hope.  There are many factors which contribute to creating social change and in this course we explore what it takes to be a successful change maker in our communities, and thus in the world.  Reversing the lens we use to approach the problems of the world is part of what a Human Ecologist needs to do to understand our challenges:
 
“...social entrepreneurs are uniquely suited to make headway on problems that have resisted considerable money and intelligence.  Where governments and traditional organizations look at problems from the outside, social entrepreneurs come to understand them intimately, from within.”  -- David Bornstein, How To Change The World
 
In this experiential, project-based course students will select a specific problem they would like to solve. Students will perform thorough research into a problem of their choosing, understanding it from within by identifying root causes and other exacerbating factors as well as investigating positive deviance and what people around the world are doing to solve this issue. Through these projects and other readings, students will examine a myriad of problems around the world and look at different strategies people are using to tackle them and create positive social change. The final project for the course will be a concrete proposal for solving the problem they selected.  Students will be evaluated based on their performance, participation and the quality of the projects they produce over the course of the term.

Level: Intermediate. Class limit: 15. Lab fee: $50.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"How are artists and scholars of sound engaging various crises in the anthropocene? What are the possibilities and limitations of responding to or representing a place through sound recording and playback? How do contemporary composers and sound artists engage place-specific material in their work? This practice-based course examines the interdisciplinary field of sound studies through close reading, listening, and hands-on (ears-on?) work in sound. Students will create place-based recording projects and site-specific sound installations that draw on local fieldwork excursions around Frenchman Bay, as well as on archival research connected to the Maine Sound and Story Archive and others. Students will sharpen skills in field recording, audio editing, multi-channel sound mixing and presentation, artistic collaboration, and building sonic-rich soundscapes as they work to create immersive sound art projects. This class will work to expand the narrative podcast format, seeking more abstract and layered forms that draw on research and storytelling to help audiences sense a place or a concept through the experience of sound. The course will examine key readings in the field of sound studies, and investigate the practice of sound artists working at the intersections of sound and climate change, sound and social (in)justice, the repatriation of sound recordings, sound and ethnographic practice, and more. Students must have prior experience recording and editing sound, and a willingness to collaborate with their peers to synthesize and realize their ideas. This course will involve fieldwork excursions outside of class time. Evaluation will be based on class participation, engagement with class projects and assignments, and the demonstration of learning in relationship to course content.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: At least one of any of the following courses (or by permission of the instructor): AD4015 Film Sound Image, HS3100 Within Living Memory, AD 1058 Dissecting Popular Music, HS3122 Navigating Change, HS3120 Audio Journalism, AD3014 Soundscape, AD1040 Audio Production and Engineering, AD 1072 Audio Production as Compositional Tool. If you have not taken one of these courses but feel you have the background to take this course, please reach out to the instructor. Class Limit: 12. Lab fee: $50. Meets the following degree requirements: ADS."
"Soundscape may be defined as an environment of sound (or sonic environment) with emphasis on the way it is perceived and understood by the individual, or by a society. It thus depends upon the relationship between the individual and any such environment. The term may refer to actual environments, or to abstract constructions such as musical compositions and tape montages, particularly when considered as an artificial environment. In this interdisciplinary course we investigate a broad range of acoustic concepts, ranging from a scientific treatment of the nature and behavior of sound both in air and underwater, the biology of hearing, the use of sound by animals in communication, and the cultural applications of sound and music in human society. Students will explore methods of composition using sounds as materials for assigned projects. Various approaches to understanding and experiencing sound will be examined, including spoken word, radio shows, music, and experimental forms. Labs will focus on understanding the nature of sound, and practical application of sound equipment, technique and theory. Students will learn about microphones, sound recording, amplification, and the physics of sound. The course will culminate in a performance to the community of student presentations that expresses the wide use of sound as part of our culture. Evaluation will be based on class participation and a set of assignments, including a final project. Emphasis will be placed on an artistic interpretation of soundscape, although students will be expected to have a basic understanding of the scientific basis of acoustic phenomena.

Level:  Intermediate.  Prerequisites: One AD and one ES course. Class Limit: 12.  Lab fee $60.  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS"
"In this course we will use creative process as a tool for developing perspectives on disability as a context-embedded expression of humanness. This class is recommended for artists and makers looking to complexify their use of corporeality, as well as students looking to engage critically with representations of and responses to disability both in and outside our educational culture at COA. We will first explore an abbreviated history of disability in the United States. Then, with Human Ecology as our lens, we will engage in a critical examination of social, medical, and disjuncture models of disability. Each class session will involve a discussion of assigned readings and viewings, collaborative activities, and gentle somatic exercises to ground our learning in our bodies. Students will be asked to reflect on their learning through the development of a small creative project each week, and in collaboration with the instructor, students will develop their own standards for assessment through a grading contract system.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: none.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: $30.  Meets the following degree requirements: none."
"In this course, we will work towards an embodied understanding of our own anatomy, as well as a deepened sense of listening, presence, and understanding of the body as a complex system. Students will explore anatomical models and be led through simple, gentle movement sequences. These exercises will be drawn from various somatic modalities such as Mind-Body Centering, Feldenkrais Technique, and Alexander Technique. Students will be asked to reflect on these explorations in a journal format, and will curate a small portion of this work to share with the class on a weekly basis. Readings, additional viewings, and drawing assignments will complement our weekly lessons. This course is recommended for performers looking to deepen their relationship to their instrument, as well as students with a strong science background who are interested in additional perspectives on anatomical study. Through consistent discussion of this work and our experiences in it, we will work to place the experiential in dialogue with the empirical.

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"This course develops intermediate and advanced written and oral communication in Spanish. It is praxis-oriented and focuses on developing language competencies directly relevant to Latin American cultural settings. Students who are planning to conduct projects or internships in those settings will find this course to be especially useful, as it aims to broaden students' specific and general vocabulary, improve their command of all tenses, and introduce them to culturally significant idioms. This course presupposes competence in basic written and oral Spanish communication.


Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: Permission of instructor. Class limit: 10. Lab Fee: $20. Meets the following degree requirements: HS."
A place-holder for Spanish language courses.
"This course develops intermediate and advanced skills in written Spanish. It emphasizes Spanish competencies most relevant to work in Latin American cultural settings. It also focuses on developing language proficiency directly relevant to projects people are interested in pursuing in Spanish-speaking environments. Work involves both reading and writing activities designed around individual goals of students and may include any genres. Evaluation is based on progress in producing effective and eloquent texts as well as the progress in developing functional writing skills for working in Spanish. This course presupposes competence in the simple tenses and a basic vocabulary.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: Permission of Instructor. Class limit: 10.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS."
"This course is immersive and interdisciplinary. Students work exclusively in Spanish, and the language is always taught through the cultural context of Latin America and more specifically Yucatán. Students learn not only in the classroom but also through constant interactions with other Spanish-speaking environments, fostering cultural enrichment and connection. This course is intended for students with a basic knowledge of grammar and some fundamental vocabulary. Daily classes and assignments strengthen the ability of students to express themselves clearly orally and through writing. Students write, read texts, present on various topics, converse in pairs and groups, sing and dance, learn basic grammar, and develop their vocabulary. Outside of the daily classes, students organize and perform in the annual Spanish Festival. The course reviews grammar structures familiar to the students before continuing with the study of additional basic grammatical structures, which may include but are not limited to: complex sentence structures in present perfect and past continuous; imperatives;  conditionals; two future tenses; personal pronouns and pronouns of direct and indirect objects; as well as more simple and compound sentence structures. Upon completing this course, students will be able to express themselves and communicate confidently in Spanish. They will be able to express general information and stories in past tenses. They will be able to express differing degrees of certainty, feelings, desires and preferences. They will also be able to express obligations, ask for permission, and explore possibilities. Evaluation is based on presentations, written compositions, listening and spoken tests, written tests covering grammar, daily homework, and most importantly class participation. 

Level: Introductory. Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. Class limit: 10. Lab fee: $30. Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"This course is immersive and interdisciplinary. Students work exclusively in Spanish, and the language is always taught through the cultural context of Latin America and more specifically Yucatán. Students learn not only in the classroom but also through constant interactions with other Spanish-speaking environments, fostering cultural enrichment and connection. This course is for students who have minimal experience with Spanish and are anticipating an immersion experience in a Spanish speaking context such as the Yucatán Program. Daily classes and assignments emphasize the development of basic comprehension and communication, both written and spoken. Students write, read texts, present on various topics, converse in pairs and groups, sing and dance, learn basic grammar, and develop their vocabulary. Outside of the daily classes, students organize and perform in the annual Spanish Festival. The grammatical structures developed in this course include but are not limited to: all parts of speech, such as articles, adjectives and adverbs in present tense; the use of reflexive verbs; past tense and all variety of sentence structures. This course also provides an orientation to living and studying in Yucatán, Mexico. The lab time is a specific formal orientation to immersion, building on the cultural context incorporated in daily classes. Upon completing this course, students will be able to express themselves and communicate confidently in Spanish. They will be able to share opinions, knowledge, questions, emotions, wishes, and preferences as well as petitions, greetings, congratulations and thanks using simple sentence structures. Additionally, they will have developed a basic cultural understanding, allowing them to incorporate themselves into new contexts with more ease. Evaluation is based on presentations, compositions, listening and spoken tests, written tests covering grammar, daily homework, and most importantly class participation.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. Class limit: 10. Lab fee: $30. Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"This course is immersive and interdisciplinary. Students work exclusively in Spanish, and the language is always taught through the cultural context of Latin America and more specifically Yucatán. Students learn not only in the classroom but also through constant interactions with other Spanish-speaking environments, fostering cultural enrichment and connection. This course is designed for students with substantial vocabulary and intermediate grammatical structures, including the imperative mood as well as simple and compound tenses in the indicative mood. Students in this course should also have some understanding of the subjunctive mood. Daily classes and assignments foster student’s abilities to express themselves clearly in speech and writing. Students write, read texts, present on various topics, and converse in pairs and groups, all while learning intermediate grammar and developing their vocabulary. Outside of the daily classes, students organize and perform in the annual Spanish Festival. This course focuses on the study of intermediate to advanced grammatical structures, which may include but are not limited to: a review of all tenses in the indicative and imperative moods, as well as an in-depth study of the subjunctive in present and past tense. Students deepen their knowledge of time markers and transitional phrases to construct more complex sentences. Upon completing this course, students will be able to communicate confidently in Spanish. They will be practiced in asking for and giving advice, paraphrasing other people's statements and opinions, and using complex structures for analysis and reflection. Evaluation is based on presentations, written compositions, listening-comprehension, written tests covering grammar, tests, daily homework, and most importantly class participation.

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: Permission of Instructor. Class limit: 10. Lab fee: $30. Meets the following degree requirements: HS."
"The ecological design research studio investigates three interrelated convictions: (1) through acts of design we can transform the inhabited (built) environment, improving the environmental quality of the sites and settings where we work (especially so for landscapes altered and degraded due to prior human activity); (2) that we can best do so through a systems-based design approach, with a goal that built (designed) and natural systems intermesh appropriately; and (3) that we can accomplish the first two commitments in a manner that is minimally extractive relative to landscapes beyond a project site (that we can and should dramatically minimize the overall ecological footprint of what we build).

To advance these commitments, the studio will focus on an actual project and site, with an eye to its future. Research in a design studio setting involves understanding the environmental dynamics of the site we will be working on, studying exemplar precedents or built examples relevant to the project at hand, gaining familiarity with theoretical ecological design and natural systems perspectives, and, ultimately, engaging in design synthesis, that is to say, developing a proposed design intervention in which the sum is greater than the parts (economy of means leads to richness of effect).

A basic background and interest in visual media (drawing, basic use of digital media, photography) is critical to a participant’s success in the studio.

How will students in this course be evaluated?: A “research” studio is a highly collaborative one, and evaluations will be based on participation and sustained engagement with the core studio themes, honing of collaborative capabilities, and commitment to an iterative process involving succinct compositions of sketches, physical models, drawings, diagrams, and other visual representations combined with short written narratives. Above all, the studio requires initiative and engagement as we transition from a highly facilitated framework at the beginning of the term (topics, resources, and methods that the instructor choreographs) to more independent and applied research given the “life” that project-based work acquires as the term progresses.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: ADS."
"In this studio class, students will develop their individual sensibilities as painters while growing their technical skills. Throughout the term, students will engage with multiple aspects of a studio practice, including stretching and preparing painting surfaces, maintaining brushes, the proper and safe use of materials, and developing ideas through drawing and maintaining sketchbooks. In the first part of the term, students will work with clothed and nude models, focusing on simplifying forms while being precise in translating color relationships and integrating the figure within a space. The projects in the second part of the term will be student-directed: students will work with the instructor to outline areas of focus for the rest of the term. Students will be introduced to several artists’ work and working methods throughout the term; discussions will include how this relates to their own work: what were the concerns of some of these artists and how did these concerns inform their work? Students will make several paintings over the course of the term; there will be an emphasis on composition and color relationships; and students will explore how paint can convey a sense of form and space. Students will be encouraged to take a broad range of approaches: from single-session paintings to sustained paintings made over the course of weeks, from working with a limited palette to a full range of colors. Students will be asked to take risks, and to allow their work to become more personal and meaningful to who they are as individuals. Evaluation will be based on students’ work, participation in class discussions, the ability to offer critical and constructive feedback to their peers, and the ability to push themselves beyond their comfort zones or perceived limitations—especially when it comes to allowing their work to evolve and change in response to feedback.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: Fundamentals of Painting or permission of instructor. Class limit: 9.  Lab fee: $250.  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS."
"This course provides practical experience in the processes required to build a theatrical production. Because each rendition of the class focuses on new source material, new production methods and concepts, students may receive credit for this course multiple times. Students research, rehearse, and produce a performance for the public in collaboration with a faculty director. The material and pedagogical focus of the course changes with each successive rendition. The number of students enrolled in the course varies depending upon the demands of the project. Students with any or no experience in theater are welcome but priority is based on seniority and/or specific academic investment in the given project, process or subject matter. In most cases, all assignments (cast and crew) will be made the previous term, through auditions and interviews. Those interested in non-actor aspects of production (set design, light and sound design, stage management, dramaturgy etc.) are especially encouraged. The course meets four days a week and those enrolled must be available for a certain amount of additional collaborative work outside class time (extra rehearsals, construction and tech work, plus final performance dates and strike). A production schedule will be available by week one. Evaluation is based on demonstrated commitment to the process as well as a final reflective paper based on the experience.  Default grading option is Credit/No Credit.    

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisites: none.  Class Limit: 12. Lab fee: $75.  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS"
"This studio arts course invites students to develop storytelling skills and practice methods of preparing and performing stories. Our exploration of storytelling, as a communicative practice and relational performance with multiple applications in daily life; whether providing testimony and witnessing, prompting topical discourse within the community, or honoring a person or tradition through living thought, it is the storyteller’s intentions that guide our methods of preparing for and evaluating a given performance within a given context. The course progresses as a practice of observing stories daily, and through preparation of three storytelling performance projects, combined with listening activities, readings, discussion, research/interview assignments and performance exercises. Evaluation will be based on participation and experimentation in class activities respective to each story project, and implementation of techniques used to address ‘story time,’ the transfer of experience from tellers to listeners. Past projects have included oral storytelling, audio podcasts, community story circles and digital storytelling,

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisites: Intro-level AD performance art course and completion of writing requirement recommended.  Class limit: 12. Lab fee: none."
"People organize to bring social change for many reasons – e. g. to end oppression, bring peace, prevent ecological collapse, promote cultural survival or advance sectarian interests. The character and success of strategies depend on social and historical contexts. People typically alternate between – or combine – varied approaches including: social movements, electoral politics, lobbying, nonviolent (or sometimes violent) struggle, technological innovation, social entrepreneurship and community organizing. This course uses theories of social movements as a starting point to look at strategies for social change and criteria for evaluating them. The course assumes it is important to understand views and strategies we disagree with respectfully and with careful analysis. The class combines readings in history and theories of social change, and diverse case studies from both the left and the right. It looks both at classic cases (e. g. Gandhi, King) and a variety of efforts from recent years and the present (e.g. Indivisible, the Tea Party, #MeToo, Zapatistas, 350.org, Black Lives Matter, Cambridge Analytica, and alternative food system entrepreneurship). This is a course for students who want to develop skills for doing critical analysis of society, for developing effective plans to create social change, and for applying strategies to implement those plans. Evaluation will be based on progress in developing those skills as demonstrated in homework and class participation, short papers, and a term project developing a sample strategy document for a viewpoint of the student’s choice. 

Level: Introductory/Intermediate.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"How do your actions impact the structures and conditions within which you exist? How do these structures impact you? How are they made? Where do you locate yourself within the structures of which you are part? With whom are you in relation? How can we think about the idea of “agency” in conditions made by economic, political, material and social forces beyond our control? What is structural change? This course examines questions about change, resistance to change, choice, power, responsibility, politics and difference through an introduction to structural and post-structural thought. Structuralism and post-structuralism are modes of thinking that posit that the parts of a structure (e.g. of a society, of a text, of an institution) are made through their relations in that structure. This course will draw on structural and post-structural work in anthropology, literature, science and technology studies (STS), in postcolonial, gender and feminist studies, as well as in deconstruction and psychoanalysis, to investigate the significance of structures of kinship, economy, and language, as well as of institutions such as the school, the military, the state and the corporation. Students will be asked to consider the relation between individual and group, material, economic, racialized and gendered conditions of existence, and notions of agency, responsibility, the individual and the human. In addition to seminar discussions of texts and short writing assignments, students will select a structure within which they are located through which to investigate the central questions of the course. Authors we read will likely include Louis Althusser, Emily Apter, Tarek El-Ariss, Charisse Burden-Stelly, Judith Butler, Jacques Derrida, Emile Durkheim, Frantz Fanon, Michel Foucault, Sigmund Freud, Stuart Hall, Donna Haraway, Ranjana Khanna, Claude Levi-Strauss, Karl Marx, Edward Said, Ferdinand de Saussure, Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak, and Anna Tsing. Films and television series we watch may include The Matrix, Blade Runner, Madam Secretary (selection) and Poor Things. Students will be evaluated based on class participation, reading responses and individual and small group assignments.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS."
"The student teaching internship represents the student teaching requirement for COA'S teacher certification candidates. Success in this experience is a pivotal criterion in the student's certification candidacy. The student is placed in a school, usually in the immediate region, with a cooperating teacher who teaches subjects and grade levels that match the certification goals of the student. The roles of student teacher, cooperating teacher, school principal, and COA supervisor are discussed and agreed upon in advance. Incrementally, the student teacher becomes familiar with class routines and gradually takes responsibility for teaching. Within the 15-week experience, the student teacher must take on a full load (all classes and all duties) for the number of weeks agreed upon by all parties. This period of time varies with subjects, grade level and specific student goals. The COA supervisor visits the schools in a liaison capacity, and also evaluates the student teacher's performance a minimum of eight times in the term. Student teachers meet together regularly to discuss such issues as curriculum planning, instruction, best teaching practices, classroom learning environment and broader educational issues. Students may use student teaching to fulfill the COA internship requirement if it is completed prior to graduation. 

Level: Advanced. Prerequisites: Permission of Ed Studies Program Director.  Meets the following degree requirements: ED"
"The student teaching internship represents the student teaching requirement for COA'S teacher certification candidates. Success in this experience is a pivotal criterion in the student's certification candidacy. The student is placed in a school, usually in the immediate region, with a cooperating teacher who teaches subjects and grade levels that match the certification goals of the student. The roles of student teacher, cooperating teacher, school principal, and COA supervisor are discussed and agreed upon in advance. Incrementally, the student teacher becomes familiar with class routines and gradually takes responsibility for teaching. Within the 15-week experience, the student teacher must take on a full load (all classes and all duties) for the number of weeks agreed upon by all parties. This period of time varies with subjects, grade level and specific student goals. The COA supervisor visits the schools in a liaison capacity, and also evaluates the student teacher's performance a minimum of eight times in the term. Student teachers meet together regularly to discuss such issues as curriculum planning, instruction, best teaching practices, classroom learning environment and broader educational issues. Students may use student teaching to fulfill the COA internship requirement if it is completed prior to graduation. 

Level: Advanced. Prerequisites: Permission of Ed Studies Program Director.  Meets the following degree requirements: ED"
"Printmaking is the process of transferring an image from one surface to another.  A print mirrors the surface whence it came and also performs as a reflection of the physical and/or immaterial realms of objects and ideas.  Representing concepts clearly in any medium requires an artist to engage in thoughtful collaboration with materials in order to realize the potential of form as a means of expression.  This studio course will explore ways to address this aesthetic challenge through printmaking.  Students will acquire basic skills as printmakers with an emphasis on relief (woodcut and linocut) and intaglio (line etching, engraving and aquatint) techniques.  They will also develop a broad understanding of the history of prints; how they have functioned to communicate, document, and transmit information through images on paper.  Students will be evaluated on their projects, participation in critiques, level of engagement with materials, ability to work in a collaborative studio, and final project. 

Level: Intermediate/Advanced.  Prerequisite: Permission of the instructor, Introduction to Arts and Design, and a drawing class.  Class limit: 6. Lab fee: $200.  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS"
"This is an introductory course in special education.  We will explore the needs of children with disabilities and techniques for meeting these needs in the regular classroom.  The course will emphasize both the social and instructional aspects of the concepts of inclusion, differentiation and serving students in the ""least restrictive environment"".  Participants will be introduced to concepts central to understanding the role of regular classroom teachers in meeting the academic, social, and emotional needs of students with disabilities. Objectives:  By the end of the course students will be able to:  identify and describe current issues and trends in education related to individuals with disabilities and their families; describe the Special education laws and procedures impacting individuals with disabilities; develop a working definition for each area of exceptionality in relation to achievement of educational goals, and develop strategies and resources for modifying, adapting and/or differentiating curriculum and instruction.

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisite:  Introductory course in Education.  Class limit: 15. Lab fee: none. Meets the following degree requirements: ED"
"This seminar serves as a design primer for human and environmentally friendly approaches to the design of the built environment captured by the term “sustainable architecture.” We will consider the different and sometimes competing understandings of what sustainable architecture means (for it is not one homogenous thing), discussing and evaluating these various “logics” from the standpoint of performance (energy efficiency and reduction in global greenhouse gas emissions for example) as well as from the perspective of aesthetics and architectural meaning. We will deconstruct and investigate building systems in the first half of the class: landscape and site systems; water; heating, cooling and ventilating (with a strong focus on passive or natural systems); and building materials, envelope, and construction. We will then discuss integrated building systems, that is to say, design strategies for achieving synergies between systems so the sum is greater than the parts (arguably the overarching goal of sustainable design). Exposure to and analysis of case study projects and guest talks by cutting edge contemporary practitioners will enrich our understanding of the current state of sustainable architecture and promising directions now under research and development.

This course does not require previous coursework in architecture and design, only interest in design and sustainability, curiosity as to their intersections, and overall commitment to the acquisition of basic architectural literacy skills that will be of value in multiple arenas and capacities (as future designer, client, advocate, critic, concerned citizen, other). Evaluations will be based on participation and sustained engagement with course material and content, maintenance of a sketchbook that combines notes and simple illustrations (diagrams), short quizzes to assess understanding of core sustainable design principles and strategies, and analysis of case study projects through a framework we will introduce in the first part of the class. 

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: $30.  Meets the following degree requirements: AD."
"In the world of design and construction, green building is a relatively recent development. Its fundamental goal is to reduce the environmental impact of the built environment. This course will introduce the field of sustainable design, explore the fundamental concepts of green design and construction, and focus on tools and strategies necessary to design and construct high-performance buildings and communities. Students will discover how the practice of quality can fulfill the goals of sustainable design and construction. Evaluation will be based upon class participation, research presentation(s) and solution for a building design problem.

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisites: Architectural Design Studio, Landscape Design Studio, construction or carpentry experience, any alternative energy course, or permission of either Isabel Mancinelli or the instructor.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $30."
"Business has tremendous societal ramifications. Inventions and industries from the automobile to the internet impact everything from air quality to economic and political freedom.  Entrepreneurs, who are often at the forefront of business and thus societal innovation, are changing the way business is conducted by creating businesses that are beneficial to the bottom line, society and the environment.  Through cases, projects and present day examples, the course will challenge students to understand the impact of business on society and the challenges and pitfalls of creating a socially responsible venture.  In addition, it will offer new frameworks for creating entrepreneurial ventures that capitalize on social responsibility to gain competitive advantage, increase valuation while benefiting society and the environment.  The final deliverable for the course is an in-class presentation in which student teams will either: (1) recommend ways to improve the social and environmental impacts of a company, while increasing competitive advantage and bottom line; or (2) benchmark two industry competitors, a socially responsible company versus a traditional company.

Level:  Intermediate. Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 15. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: HS."
"Music has been a powerful component of human ecology since time immemorial. It can carry our stories, express our values, communicate aspects of our individual and communal identities, and help us understand those of others. Consequently, the ways that music has been transmitted across generations have had profound impacts on the course of humanity. Understanding how and why music is taught and learned is, therefore, crucial to understanding human ecology. Using transdisciplinary resources from social studies, musicology, education studies, neuroscience, and more, this course will explore how people learn music, what people learn through music, and how musical teaching practices can reflect and shape the cultural identities of individual learners and their communities. In addition to taking part in seminars centered around multimedia course materials, students in this course will observe and engage in music teaching and learning experiences–both formal and informal. Assessment of student work will include participation in class discussions and musical experiences, a report on music education practices in a chosen cultural context, reflective journals on a multi-week music teaching or learning practice, and a demonstration lesson that uses music in some way. All musical interests and levels of musicianship (including novices) are welcome in this course.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: $35.  Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"In a world marked by complexity, uncertainty, and diverse challenges, the role of teachers extends far beyond the transmission of knowledge. Students in this course will explore the question of what helps certain teachers to bring a continual sense of hope to their professional practice despite often relatively low pay, long hours, negative attention during political clashes, and increasing stressors on youth and society that inevitably appear in the classroom. Why do people choose to teach? And what keeps them in the classroom? How do teachers experience the impact of various education-focused policies on their efforts, and what are some ways teachers navigate and influence policy to maintain their visions for successful schools? Through critical readings, podcasts, guest speakers, small group interviews, and classroom observations students will reflect on how teachers bring and maintain hope in their learning communities. Students can expect to speak with area teachers as well as education experts from a variety of realms, and texts will include choices from authors such as Patrick Harris II, bell hooks, John Dewey, Regie Routman, Parker Palmer, and Nel Noddings. Final projects will allow students to creatively share their learning with one another and with teachers whose ideas have been most influential in their growing understanding of this realm of world-changing efforts. This course is suitable for future teachers or those considering teaching as well as education enthusiasts and anyone interested in the profound impact of education on society.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: none.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: none.  Meets the following degree requirements: ED, HS."
"Where do babies come from? Can you pee with a tampon in? If a boy withdraws his penis and doesn’t use a condom, what are the chances of getting pregnant? What if you enjoy gay sex but you think you’re straight? From birth to death people are curious about their bodies and relationships. So why is it that so many people feel they lack the knowledge and skills to be sexually healthy? This class will begin by exploring the tenets of comprehensive sexuality education (CSE), its history, and the religious, cultural and political reasons as to why it is or isn’t taught across the globe. Over the course of the term, students will explore theoretical frameworks and strategies for teaching CSE, design an original lesson plan, practice facilitating, and provide feedback to their peers. Course topics may include strategies for cultivating safe learning environments and tools for promoting classroom discussion. We will discuss the principles of mentorship and how to engage young people in positive conversations about sexual decisions, as well as how to navigate teaching across diverse cultures, personalities and learning preferences. This hybrid course will be taught through a combination of evening zoom sessions with occasional Saturday, day-long intensives. Students will be expected to attend Maine’s Annual Comprehensive Sexuality Education Conference. Evaluation will be based on class participation (which will include small classroom assignments), writing an original lesson plan, and delivering a sex education event on campus. Readings will include writing on evidence-based approaches to sexuality education.

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: Introduction to Sexual Health or equivalent experience. Class limit: 12. Lab Fee: None."
"This course explores politics of the terrestrial, of the earth and its defenders, through lenses of both theory and practice. Through their writings and, where possible, in direct conversation, we interact with activists and movements involved in struggles to protect earth, land, livelihoods, and community, and those actively working to build alternatives to ways of being in the world that they are struggling against. We also read theoretical reflections on these struggles, drawing from scholars in the fields of political ecology, political ontology, and political economy, among others. Locally rooted activities take place within global economic and political contexts – markets, international treaties, and other spaces and places where local and global come into contact, where ontologies collide, and where different forms of power are produced and interact across distances. Course materials and discussion will explore these global contexts, concrete ways and means by which economic and political power is contested in these spaces, and ongoing experiments with and strivings toward a different world, one where many worlds may fit. Topics explored include resistance against mining and other extractive industries, pipeline fights, land grabbing for agro-industrial expansion, carbon and biodiversity offset markets, and geoengineering. Evaluation in the class will be based on preparation for and participation in class discussions, regular reflective essays on readings, and a final extended essay, presentation, or podcast on some aspect of terrestrial politics.

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 18.  Lab fee: None.  Mets the following degree requirements: HS"
"Collecting is a reflection of human ecology; it involves the interconnectedness of the physical and biological, people and their environment, and it addresses issues present in those interconnections. This seminar course will explore a variety of ethical, philosophical, and practical issues related to collections held by museums, libraries, and archives. Students will hear from and interact with collections professionals from diverse institutions throughout the US. Lectures, readings, and discussions will explore topics such as why and what we collect, the past and future of collecting activity, practical challenges of organizing and maintaining collections, telling stories through collections, and ethical questions surrounding collecting and displaying culture and ideas. Special attention will be given to current events in libraries, archives, and museums. Certain class sessions will also be open to local libraries, archives, and museum professionals. 

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: Can be satisfied through museum, library or education work-study; or a relevant History, Philosophy, Ethics, Anthropology or Education course. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: $20."
"This is a seminar course which is one of three courses required to be taken together. The three courses make up a ""monster course"" with the overall title ""The Story of Humans in Maine Told Through Sediment"". Students will learn about the application of emerging analytical techniques in the field of paleoecology. We will learn the theory behind techniques such as aDNA, lipid biomarker analysis, and the characterization of preserved leaf waxes. We will discuss recent literature in these areas. Students will be evaluated on literature discussions, and written responses to papers. 

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Co-requisites: ES2051 Captured in Sediment: The Peopling of Maine and ES2052 Gas Chromatography Mass Spectrometry. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: ES."
"This course considers the definition of the human in terms of the politics of climate change and discussions about the notion of the Anthropocene, by staging an encounter between the discipline of geology and work in the humanities. Suggestions by scientists over the last few decades that human activity on the planet has attained geological force led Nobel Laureate Paul Crutzen to argue in 2000 that the current epoch should be called the ""Anthropocene."" Others challenge this suggestion, pointing out that humans have long left traces on the earth. Discussions about the Anthropocene are tied to the challenge of how to respond to the effects of human-induced climate change, including the threat of human extinction. This course will address questions such as: How do scientists and humanists engage with policy and scholarship about climate change? What are their central questions and key terms? We will consider how understandings of geological time and the stories rocks tell, might inform thinking in the humanities about climate change. In turn, we will consider how humanist questions about the definition of the human might inform the ways in which science interfaces with politics and policy regarding climate change. 

This course is co-taught by a geologist and an anthropologist, and will be an exercise in translation between very different fields. Class material will include laboratory activities, seminar discussions, and close readings of texts in postcolonial studies, geology, anthropology, and literature. Students will be assessed based on class participation, reading responses, laboratory activities, and a final project. 

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisites: None, but preference will be given to those who have had prior course work in either anthropology or geology. Permission of instructor required.  Class limit: 16.  Lab fee: $10. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"When you keep a natural history field journal, you join a long and proud tradition, shared through time with naturalists, explorers, and artists. Careful observation of nature, followed by careful writing and illustration, is a time-tested technique for “capturing” some of the wonders of the planet’s life. While many of us have become dependent on technology to record notes and photographs, the practice of keeping a physical journal confers many advantages. Making a sketch requires you to look closely at your subject in a way that taking a photograph does not. A carefully created field notebook is a permanent record that will outlive technical obsolescence and even the life of its creator. Today, the field notebooks of figures such as Henry Walter Bates, Alexander von Humboldt, and Maria Sibylla Merian continue to provide useful data and artistic inspiration centuries after the death of their creators. Students will develop a regular natural history field journal practice by creating a journal as a record of their journey through Costa Rica. Along the way, they will document their observations through structured and unstructured entries using a variety of writing and drawing techniques. Assignments will be based on content from Introduction to Tropical Field Ecology and Tropical Entomology. The journals will be exhibited in an end of term show at the Dorr Museum. Evaluation will be based on completion of assigned entries, individual growth, and overall commitment to all aspects of this immersion experience. 

This course is part of a three-credit expeditionary program in neotropical field ecology. Students must enroll in all three courses.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: Co-enrollment in ES3099 Introduction to Tropical Field Ecology and ES3100 Tropical Entomology, and permission of instructor. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: $1,600 (for all three courses). Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"The archetype of the clown exists in many cultural contexts throughout time - those individuals whose role it is to turn society on its head, poke fun at the powerful and make literal fun of our own flaws and vulnerabilities – society’s pressure-release valve. Contrary to common pop-culture depictions, clown is a form that requires tremendous vulnerability, self-knowledge and the ability to respond spontaneously in any performance context. The work in this class will be derived from a sequence of games and exercises geared toward the discovery and development of each student’s own clown self. Training and research will be drawn from theatrical improv traditions, stand-up comedy, circus history and European and Canadian clown pedagogies. Students will perform for each other every week, experimenting with different approaches. Some readings and video will be required. Students will be evaluated on effective preparation and engagement with all materials and course topics as well as completion of all class assignments. The default grading for this course is credit/no credit.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: $50. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"The Camino monster course travels the roughly 500-mile pilgrimage route of the Camino Frances. Students will walk the path from St. Jean Pied-du-Port to Santiago de Compostela that millions have traveled since the end of the 9th century. Designated as the first Cultural Route of the Council of Europe and a UNESCO World Heritage Site, the route starts in France, crossing the Pyrenees and traveling through the vineyards, plains of wheat and sunflower, verdant hills, medieval villages, and storied cities of northern Spain. While founded as a Catholic pilgrimage, people walking the route today may be embarking on a personal challenge, wrestling with existential questions and life transitions, searching for an intentional community with more caring societal norms or journeying for a myriad of other reasons. Intertwined with the Camino’s religious, cultural, and personal significance is its role as an economic engine across the millennia. The Roman roads and forts are testament to its long standing economic significance. From the age of the Knights Templar through today, the Camino continues to be the economic lifeblood of the region and the small businesses, inns and villages along the route.  The course has two primary components. First, students will investigate the human ecology of the Camino through modern and ancient readings, film screenings, visits to sites of historical and cultural significance, and interactions with pilgrims. These materials and interactions will inform group discussions, as well as papers, presentations and other deliverables.  Second, to move students beyond their quotidian routine, participants will follow a guided plan of self-discovery, introspection, and reflection that will take place on and around their daily walks. These activities include a series of exercises, one-on-one meetings, and journaling. Evaluation will be based on engagement with the course, participation in group discussions and meetings, quality of the various written and verbal assignments, and the capstone research project.  There are no prerequisites or language requirements. However, some knowledge of Spanish is encouraged and can provide for a more enriching experience. Students must be capable of walking with a 20+ pound backpack over a variety of terrain for an average of 12.4 miles (20 km) per day. 

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $1,100. Meets the following degree requirements: HS."
"This year-long class will consist of a series of workshops, activities, and field trips over the course of the academic year. The course will be focused on learning all stages of hard cider production from evaluating fruit to fermentation all the way to the final bottling and label design. There will be additional background and contextual readings on the history and culture of cider. The goal will be to produce a hard cider ready in the following year. Working with cider makers from Maine and New England students will learn about how to identify the qualities in apples that make for excellent cider. They will then harvest fruit locally by foraging for high quality fruit to press into cider. With local cider makers students will then begin the fermentation process from monitoring the biochemistry of the juice through racking and secondary fermentation. Finally, in the spring the class will design the final labels, bottle the cider, and, in accordance with state law, evaluate the quality. At each stage participants will have workshops, readings, and projects that are part of the class. All students will be required to participate in a core series of workshops and activities, and then they will choose from among other activities as well. The course is appropriate for those interested in food studies, biochemistry, agricultural history, and botany, among other fields. No previous coursework required, but preference will be given to students who have some relevant academic background or personal experience. Evaluation will be based on engagement with and completion of core shared work, participation in workshops and field trips, and individual projects. There may be an optional two week trip to England to visit and learn from traditional cider makers there. This is a year-long course carrying a single credit. Students must be on campus for all three terms of the academic year.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced.  Prerequisites: Permission of instructor; see above.  Class limit: 11.  Lab fee: $125.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"This course provides a broad historical overview of the early years of the “Cold War” period that shaped global politics generally and American foreign policy specifically. Beginning in the 1940’s and leading up to Richard Nixon's election in 1968 we will examine the diplomatic relationship between the United States and the Soviet Union and how this relationship has impacted state actors, economic policies, cultural production, and conceptions of identity. While there will be a heavy focus on traditional state-level diplomatic history, students will also explore a broad array of methodological approaches. Class sessions will include a mix of traditional lecture formats, class discussion, and outside presentations. An evening lab is scheduled in order to screen a variety of cultural artifacts from the various periods we will cover. The primary goal is to give students an intensive 10-week crash course into key events, concepts, figures, etc.. that defined the early decades of Cold War diplomacy. At the same time there is also time allocated for students to explore their own independent research interests. Given the far-reaching force of Cold War politics into everyday life, individuals with widely varying academic interests will find the course informative and productive. Evaluation will be based on a mix of class participation, individual research assignments, and exams. All students, regardless of their backgrounds, previous coursework, or interests are welcome. 

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 30. Lab fee: none. Meets the following degree requirements: HY HS"
"This course provides a broad historical overview of the early years of the “Cold War” period that shaped global politics generally and American foreign policy specifically. Beginning with the election of  Richard Nixon's in 1968 and following up to today, we will focus on the diplomatic relationship between the United States and the Soviet Union/Russia and how this relationship has impacted state actors, economic policies, cultural production, and conceptions of identity. While there will be a heavy focus on traditional state-level diplomatic history, students will also explore a broad array of methodological approaches. Class sessions will include a mix of traditional lecture formats, class discussion, and outside presentations. An evening lab is scheduled in order to screen a variety of cultural artifacts from the various periods we will cover. The primary goal is to give students an intensive 10-week crash course into key events, concepts, figures, etc.. that defined the later decades of Cold War diplomacy. At the same time there is also time allocated for students to explore their own independent research interests. Given the far-reaching force of Cold War politics into everyday life, individuals with widely varying academic interests will find the course informative and productive. Evaluation will be based on a mix of class participation, individual research assignments, and exams.While this class is designed to compliment the topics covered in The Cold War: Early Years, students are not required to have had this earlier class. Both courses are designed as ""stand alone.""  All students, regardless of their backgrounds, previous coursework, or interests are welcome. 

Level: Intermediate. Class limit: 20. Lab fee: none. Meets the following degree requirements: HS HY"
"This course examines the techniques and expressive possibilities of photographing “natural” landscapes, the built environment, and the intersection of the two subjects. Using historic makers for inspiration some slide lectures will be included, but each student will be expected to do some research on their own to find inspiration from other artists. Being inclusive of various aesthetics, we’ll explore differing expressions of beauty and students will be expected to engage ways of working outside their own comfort zone. Readings by Rebecca Solnit, Lucy Lippard, Frank Gohlke, Deborah Bright, Robert Adams, Richard Misrach, John Stilgoe, Bill McKibben, and Geoffrey Batchen, among others, will inform our discussions. Weekly shooting assignments, and readings will be expected prior to mid term. After mid term, you will work toward one final project that explores your own personal expressive choices based on your interests and affinities. These final projects will be displayed publicly, if possible, during week ten. Some prior experience with Adobe Lightroom Classic or Photoshop is highly recommended. Students will be evaluated on the completion of weekly and final projects, and participation in discussions and critiques; pass/fail grade encouraged.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: AD1026 Introduction to Photography. Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $100.  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS"
"This course selects from among the most interesting, diverse, and well-written of contemporary women’s novels — many from the global South and all from other countries than the US — to focus on questions of women’s writing (and how/whether it can be treated as a literary and formal category), gender identity and women’s issues, and the tensions between sameness and difference among women’s experiences, and narrations of women’s experiences, around the world. The course begins by acknowledging the historical realities that limited women’s narrative options in the publishing industry until quite recently. We will examine a relatively unknown yet rather extraordinary short novel from 1967:  Sawako Ariyoshi’s The Doctor’s Wife.  After Ariyoshi, we will read from quite varied authors published within the last fifty years, writers such as:  Buchi Emecheta, Clarice Lispector, Nawal El Saadawi, Tsitsi Dangarembga, Hanan al-Shaykh, Jeannette Winterson, Rose Tremain, Nora Okja Keller, Fadia Faqir, and Yvonne Vera. We will also read some classic and contemporary feminist literary theory to gain a sense of how feminist scholars approach women’s novels and our questions. The course is especially designed for students interested in women’s and gender issues who have had some previous experience with literary analysis, close reading of texts, and/or feminist theory. As one way to do the work of an intermediate/advanced class, each student will choose an additional author to investigate, either a novelist or theorist who has published since 2000, and read a novel or theoretical essay by this author outside of class. Students will be evaluated based on class engagement, response papers, passage analyses, a presentation to the class of the outside novel or theory and the questions it raises, and a final evaluation essay. 

Level: Intermediate/Advanced.  Prerequisite: a previous literature course and signature of the instructor. Class limit: 15. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: HS."
"This group study aims to research historical and current practices of drag as an art form, a political act, and somatic practice. The group will engage in questions of what drag is, who it serves, what it looks like and has looked like in the U.S. and beyond, and its relation to other genres of performance such as burlesque and clown. We will research those questions through reading queer theory text and drag artists' memoirs, and viewing documentaries, filmed performances, and live shows in Bangor or Portland. We will examine where drag is now and investigate recent legislation against drag artists and the queer community in the U.S., as well as drag's role within queer culture and the implied binaries of Queens and Kings. 

Alongside this research, we will also dive into the medium ourselves. The group will explore drag culture through the fashion, music, and subcultures that we are personally tapped into to create individual drag personas. Our goal in performing will be to authentically investigate personal experiences of gender and use it to experiment and play with costuming, make-up, movement, and comedy. The study will culminate in a drag show at the end of the term that we hope inspires and brings joy to the College of the Atlantic community and Mount Desert Island community."
"In this course we will explore the ways life on land and in the sea are entangled with the changing forces and light of the moon’s monthly orbit. The fundamental questions of this course are “ In what ways does the moon matter?” and “What are the kinds of evidence we choose to use to answer this question?”.  We will move between scientific evidence and mythological accounts for large and small scale phenomena ranging from ocean and earth tides, spawning, menstruation, plant growth and development to the lives of the moon and sun gods, moon shots, and the past and present moon-based praxis informing subsistence and capitalist cultures.  We will examine how these two ways of knowing are and are not commensurate through the challenge of designing a scientific study to test the effects of the moon on radish germination and growth over one lunar cycle. The aim of the study will be to simultaneously conduct the measurements by COA alumni around the world. Evaluations will be based on a lunar journal beginning with winter solstice, a compilation of stories and myths accompanied by reflections on the role of the moon within their spatial and cultural context, participation in class discussion and exercises, and a final project with an oral and written component. 

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: none.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: $25.  Meets the following degree requirements: none."
"In this seminar, we will cover the history of printmaking. Rather than take a chronological approach to print history, the seminar examines four broad themes surrounding historical and contemporary printmaking: prints and politics, printmaking as a process, the appropriated image, and collaboration/participation. These themes encompass a breadth of artists, works and time periods. The ideas presented and discussed in this seminar provide a context and a ground for the student to more clearly define their own creative practice and relationship to the history of printed art forms. Readings, writing assignments, and at-home projects challenge students to critically position themselves, as well as the practice of print in general, within the broader scope of visual culture. It also assists in developing a habit of research, and understand that it can be an essential part of the creative process. Assessment will be based on evidence that the student has completed assignments and readings; and, active and meaningful participation in seminar discussions.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"Natural History can be regarded as the oldest ""science"" -indeed, at one point within the Western canon Natural History WAS science.  Beginning with discussion of early hunter-gatherers, working past Ashurbanipal, King of Kings, Hellenistic Greece, the Roman Empire, and into the herbals and magicians of the Middle Ages, this course will survey the development and eventual fragmentation of Natural History into more specialized branches. Once a foundation has been established, we will engage with the naturalists of the great age of exploration and conquest during the 17th through the 19th centuries, ending with an examination of Natural History's legacy in the rise of modern Ecology.  Course readings will draw heavily on original sources, using translations where appropriate. Towards the end of the term we will discuss the strengths and limitations of inductive and deductive reasoning in science and the implications of the 20th and 21st centuries' increased emphasis on theoretical reasoning.  Students will gain a better sense of Euro-American history overall and of the history of science in particular; the ability to use original sources; understanding of the importance of comparing multiple sources in arriving at historical conclusions and of the importance of recognizing cultural and historical biases in interpretation of information.  Evaluation will be based on class participation and the spoken and written presentation of individually chosen research on a person or topic important to the development of natural history as a science.  

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: none.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $50.  Meets the following degree requirements: HY"
"The History of Rock......""We were just the spokesmen for a generation"" A social history of Rock and Roll, from it's origination in the Blues, through the Rhythm and Blues of the 50's, into the era of Little Richard, Chuck Berry, and Elvis. From the British invasion to heavy metal, rap, and even Dylan and other poets like him that couldn't sing either. We've got it covered. You will listen to it,  you will read about it, you will watch it happen on videos (no BeeGees or Tony Orlando)...we will connect it to the times......and what turbulent times they were.  If you are interested in what happened culturally in this country between 1950 and today, you need not look any farther than this course. For ""the music of the people"", ROCK, accurately reflects the varying peaks and valleys of much of the events of the past half century.   

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: none.  Class limit: 20.  Lab fee $10.  Meets the following degree requirements: AD, HY"
"This course examines the challenges, threats and opportunities emerging with technologies associated with Artificial Intelligence. It will consider the nature of intelligence in its many forms in humans and nature and examine how these and other forms of intelligence may be coded into emerging AI technologies or developed through various forms of machine learning, evolutionary programming, et cetera. Sample topics include roles of AI in education, health, agriculture, transportation, policing, military, scientific research, the arts, spiritual traditions, religions, government, language translation, and bridging relations between different cultures.

Goals are to develop: understandings of the basic programming principles, research and development strategies and underlying philosophical assumptions guiding development in such technologies; abilities to use interdisciplinary, problem centered approaches to understand complicated vs. “wicked” problems associated with rapid technological change and key approaches to dealing with them; collaborative skills for problem-centered studies and programming projects in AI in areas of student interest; and meta-cognitive abilities to learn these kinds of material in groups as well as on your own.

Students pursue term projects individually or collaboratively which may include; futures studies use of methods of historical and/or social science research to investigate some emerging, AI-related social or environmental concern; a computer programming project that solves a practical problem, is conducive to artistic expression, performs scientific analysis of quantitative data, or demonstrates an established or experimental feature of an Machine Learning or otherwise AI system; or a philosophical and/or theoretical critical analysis of underlying concepts, values or assumptions that are at stake in the emerging AI technologies.

Readings will include classic texts in AI theory, philosophy, and futures studies as well as selections from standard texts on AI programming like that of Stuart Russell and Peter Norvig. We will also use podcasts, films, and other media to pursue key topics and trends. There will be a series of short programming activities to study basic principles and try modelling aspects of more complicated and/or complex systems. These will be done, at least initially, in block coding accessible to students without previous programming experience. We will examine the ways in which they can be coded in Python and students familiar with that or other languages will be able to pursue homework and final project work in whatever language they may prefer.

Class sessions and lab will vary in format from extended discussion of texts and problems to supplementary lecture, visiting speakers, collaborative coding activities and extended project work. The class as a group will develop at least one major hackathon style project as a way of exploring key issues and developing key skills.

Evaluation will be based on the extent to which students demonstrate in homework, class participation and term projects that they have advanced in each of the four main goals for the course.

Level:  Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: A readiness to engage with theoretical models, methodological techniques, basic programming, and philosophical questions in disciplined and critical ways. There is no specific course requirement for this class. However, it will assume students are familiar with at least some of the key issues raised in the course. Permission of the instructor. Class limit:15. Lab fee: $35. Meets the following degree requirements: HS."
"Wilderness has been the clarion call for generations of environmentalists.  Henry David Thoreau once said, ""In wildness is the preservation of the world."" That single sentence and the controversy surrounding that idea provides the central focus of our explorations over the term.  This course examines the question of wilderness from multiple perspectives in the hopes of providing an understanding of the concept and real spaces that constitute wilderness.  Starting with a week-long canoe trip down Maine's Allagash Wilderness Waterway, we look at historical and contemporary accounts of the value of wilderness, biological, and cultural arguments for wilderness, and the legal and policy difficulties of ""protecting"" wilderness.  Considerable time is spent evaluating current criticisms of the wilderness idea and practice.  Students are involved in a term-long project involving potential wilderness protection in Maine.  This involves some weekend travel and work in the Maine Woods.  Classwork emphasizes hands-on projects as well as theoretical discussions.

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisite: HS4026 Environmental Law & Policy or permission of instructor.  Class limit: 14.  Lab fee: $275.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"This group study work in conjunction with Alya Kiiashko's senior project. Its purpose is to allow multiple theater-makers to collaborate and stage the play ""The Little Prince"", written by Cummins and Scoullar. ""The Little Prince"" is a theatrical adaptation of the original novella by Antoine de Saint-Exupéry.

Apart from the main objective of making this production happen, the course will also serve as an opportunity for everyone on the team to explore and develop skills in their individual roles. Such roles will include acting, stage management, music, light and sound operation, costume design, etc."
"This course covers key aspects of the history and culture of the Yucatecan Maya, including pre-Hispanic, colonial, and modern times. Lectures, discussions, and readings by and about the Maya will explore topics such as social structure, religion, politics, agricultural practices, language, family life, and other cultural aspects. Classwork will include participation in discussions, small research projects, oral presentations, and brief field journal entries on cultural observations. This course involves several field trips to various socio-cultural locations in the city of Mérida and Mayan communities, as well as visits to sites of biological and cultural significance, such as archaeological zones and natural reserves. Workshops and talks will aid students in comprehending the cultural context and topics covered in class. The class includes an ethnographic project that involves bibliographical and field research in both urban and rural contexts. The final assignment consists of a written essay and an oral presentation. Upon completing this course, students will be able to socialize and interact in diverse social and cultural contexts with cultural competency and sensitivity. Additionally, they will be acquainted with ethnographic techniques that allow them to develop new perspectives on others and the relationships they have with their diverse environments. This course will be taught entirely in Spanish, and evaluation will be based on class participation, homework assignments, and the ethnographic project.

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisite: Permission of Instructor. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: none. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"This is a course in the history and culture of  the Yucatec Maya offered as part of the College's Yucatan Program in Mexico. It will cover key features of the Pre-Hispanic, Colonial and Modern eras.  Readings will include classic texts by and about them as well as contemporary studies in archaeology and anthropology. Themes will include social structure, religion, politics,  agricultural practices, language and family life. Homework will include various short writing assignments and oral project reports. Field trips in and around Merida will be included both to visit archaeological sites of special interest and also to visit contemporary communities of Maya. Each student will do a  major final project which will include research in texts and fieldwork which culminate in an extended study on site in a Maya village.  This course will be taught entirely in Spanish. 
 
Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisite: signature of Yucatan program director and co-enrollment in HS6010 Spanish Language and HS2021 Immersion Practica. Lab fee: none. Class limit: 12. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"This course will be an intermediate/advanced seminar honoring and exploring the works of Toni Morrison (1931–2019), an African-American author who won the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1993, the Pulitzer Prize for Fiction in 1988 and numerous other notable awards. She was a giant of a public intellectual and contemporizing figure in American Literature; her works continue to inspire and transform readers and scholars of all identities although her primary purpose was to write for black people. As Morrison herself said, ""If there is a book that you want to read, but it hasn't been written yet, you must be the one to write it."" In writing she changed the literary landscape of the US. In particular, her poetics illustrate how African-American and especially African-American women authors express depths of meaning and experience absolutely central to any understanding of the complex culture and histories of the US. Another Morrison quote hints at the profundity of her own view of her life's work: ""We die. That may be the meaning of life. But we do language. That may be the measure of our lives."" These two quotes provide a framework for the course, which seeks students interested in language and its power, literature and its insights, and the black female experience. Over the course of the term students will read through Morrison’s oeuvre of novels (The Bluest Eye, Sula, Song of Solomon, Tar Baby, Beloved, Jazz, Paradise, Love, A Mercy, Home, God Help the Child) as well as a number of her key essays and addresses (Playing in the Dark, The Source of Self-Regard), scholarly criticism, and responses to Morrison's 2019 passing. There may be some division of labor with the later novels (after Paradise), but the course is reading intensive. Students will also prepare frequent short written responses and a final project responding to Morrison in some way. Evaluation will be based on class participation, response papers, passage analysis, and the final Morrison project to be shared with the class. 

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: Prior literary study, and permission of instructor.  Class Limit: 15.  Lab fee: none.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"This is an advanced writing focused course in which students practice the human ecology of literary analysis.  We explore the 'mind' or consciousness of fictional writing (specifically, novels) by looking at how narratives make meaning, and at how we make meaning from narratives.  The course surveys some of the best modern fiction, with a particular focus on works that highlight narrative technique, stretch the boundaries of the imagination, have a rich and deep texture, and push against the inherent limitations of textuality.  Students also hone their reading and analytic skills as they work closely with twentieth century texts that broke new literary ground.   Some of the authors we may read include:  Joseph Conrad, Virginia Woolf, William Faulkner, Monique Wittig, John Dos Passos, Toni Morrison, N. Scott Momaday, Bessie Head, Manuel Puig, and Margaret Atwood.  We also study some narrative (and possibly film) theory.  Evaluation is based on class participation, frequent short response and passage analysis papers, and an independent project.

Level:  Advanced.  Prerequisite: Signature of Instructor.  Offered every other year.  Class limit: 15.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"What kind of work is writing poetry? How do poets construct verse through diction, imagery, and technical elements? This introductory course traces the development of the poetic vocation and poetic form through Western literature. We will focus on how poets writing in English from the 14th century onward have worked to establish their profession, drawing on classical tradition to define a new social and economic role. We will also investigate how social, political, economic, and linguistic developments, such as the Industrial Revolution, Great Depression, movements of the 1960s, and rise of internet culture, have informed what it means to be a poet in our society. Reading selections of poetry from medieval and early modern periods through the present will enable us to study how socioeconomics, race, gender, and assumptions about the nature of work shape who has historically been eligible for and excluded from the profession. Evaluation is based on two short papers, weekly response papers, and class participation. Students are encouraged to consider poetry broadly, including spoken word, song, and concrete poetry, and to explore other national poetic traditions in assignments and class discussions.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 12.  Lab Fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"Is having debt good or bad? Is having credit card debt worse than having student loans, and if so why? Why are home mortgages usually set up over the course of 30 years? If a country paid to educate you, do you “owe” them? Are you indebted to your parents and if you are, should you pay them back in money or in some other way? These are some of the questions that will be explored in this class. This course will cover interpretations of the rise of money, the social power of debt (both monetary and other), and the disconnect between the ways in which people think about debt and the way households and companies actually use it and the function debt plays in the economy. This course will use both sociological and anthropological readings to inform your understanding of the connections between money and meaning. Successful completion of this course will depend heavily on completing the weekly readings. Evaluation will be based on course participation and three short papers.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: None."
"Understanding how we as humans experience life beyond our “built” and “human” environments ought to be a fundamental aspect of our existence but, increasingly, it is not. This class considers the relationship of humans to their natural environments and asks how our natural environments impact us as individual humans, humans in different natural settings, and groups of humans. It will include perspectives from Ecopsychology, Positive Psychology, and ways of understanding nature and our relationship(s) with it from multiple perspectives, including Indigenous perspectives from Turtle Island, the perspective of Settlers and Migrants, as well as both Indigenous and Non-Indigenous perspectives from non-Western societies. We will also explore different research methods to help us understand the effects of nature on well-being.

The course will include an experiential and journaling component in addition to discussions and assigned readings. Classes will include two regular discussion/working meetings as well as one “experiential” session per week including a hike or other ways of spending time in natural and/or cultivated environments on land or water. Classroom sessions will involve discussion with written responses, opportunities to lead discussions, and assignments throughout the semester. We will learn to observe our own responses to experiences and combine these with readings and discussions of both qualitative and quantitative research for understanding our experiences in nature. Students will be evaluated based on attendance, in-class/experiential participation, reading responses, and a final project that demonstrates depth of understanding on a topic of their choice in the Psychology of Nature.  A note about accessibility: This will be an inclusive experience and you are not expected to be able to hike the Appalachian Trail or canoe the Allagash. It will be a “choose your challenge” approach with respect to both difficulty/strenuousness and degree of “nature” that is involved, although you are expected to dress appropriately for being outside during the experiential sessions. Outdoor adventurers of all sorts are welcome from the intrepid to the trepid and everyone in between.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: $25. Meets the following degree requirements: HS."
"Edmund Burke’s chief contribution to aesthetics is his exegesis on the contrary states that define the Beautiful and the Sublime: these are the regular and irregular, binaries of pleasure and pain, appeal and terror, knowingness and not-knowing. Burke encourages the viewer of a ‘place’ to distance herself from the natural agencies that incite emotional response to landscapes. In keeping a distance; however, we risk participating in a lifeless, hegemonic practice that colonizes nature and hinders aesthetic engagement. Proximity to nature (rather than detachment from it) makes visible the consequences of eighteenth-century imperial and nineteenth-century nationalist missions masked in many of the works of the Hudson River School. Non-native forces in the Western Hemisphere took ownership of humans, places, resources, and in the process, devastated whole peoples and ecologies. Through travel, study, research and creative activity, students will learn to see and appraise the transformation of peripatetic practice into art; as well as witness how art can both reveal and conceal the nature of place. How have the varied notions of sublimity affected artist practice over the past 250 years? What are artists making now that counters a narrative that privileges detachment over intimacy and counters modernity’s embrace of indifference? This course will consider the concept of sublimity, both as subject and agent, in the work of visual artists during the aforementioned epochs and the present one. Students will be evaluated on class participation, annotated bibliography, and research paper.

Level: Advanced.  Prerequisites: An art history, anthropology, or literature course.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $30.  Meets the following degree requirements: AD, HY"
"There are myriad realities described by artists and authors. This course concerns itself specifically with the development of visual Realism from 1800-1945 in Europe and America. We will examine the origin of artist methodologies of production as they relate to modernity. Our concerns will include the relation of art to significant political, sociological, and psychological programs of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. The new realities created through revolutions in political and social structures, and in our understanding of the physical composition of the world itself are made evident in art that pictures social class, large historical moments, and a specific instant of time in a way that changes how we visualize reality and challenges our understanding of actuality. Students will be evaluated based on class participation, class discussion leadership, reading notes, and written paper. 

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Pre-requisites: none. Class limit: 16. Lab Fee: $30. Meets the following degree requirements: AD"
"Waste is all around us, yet often nearly invisible. The US Environmental Protection Agency estimates that the average American generates over four pounds of waste each day. This course will look carefully at our discards, bringing them into focus as a wicked sustainability challenge, a source of value, and a cultural product. Students will critically engage with efforts and infrastructures to manage and reduce waste in the state of Maine and beyond. This course moves beyond critique, however, to focus on potential solutions to the waste problem. Our focus will be, as James Ferguson suggests, to think through “real strategies and tactics that would enable one to mobilize around specific programs or initiatives that one might be for, not against.” Through readings, experiential learning, guest lectures, critical reflection, and discussions, students will explore (1) the scale and scope of the waste problem, (2) strategies for managing and reducing waste, and (3) the role of policy in addressing waste issues. This course will emphasize experiential learning. Students will visit sites where waste is processed and revalued to explore the benefits and barriers of these practices as solutions to the waste problem. Students will be evaluated based on their participation, as well as through short written assignments that emphasize critical reflection, synthesis, and translation of academic theories for broader policy audiences.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None.  Class Limit: 15.  Lab fee: none."
"In this course we will explore embroidery, the stitched mark, as a drawing tool. Focus will be on individual expressive mark making and content building. Basic embroidery stitches will be taught and no experience is necessary. Embroidery can be loose and fast or a slow precise process. We will use cotton embroidery floss and yarn to stitch onto up-cycled or surplus and salvaged fabric creating meaning through image, surface, texture, form, and narrative. Fabric as an embroidery surface is pliable and easily transformed into dimensional forms allowing our work to move into the realms of sculpture and installation. Students will be encouraged to develop their own stitched visual language culminating in a final project. We will look at the work of contemporary artists using embroidery as part of their practice as well makers in an art/craft historical context. Stitch making as creative meaning making spans all cultures and times. Students will be evaluated based on class participation, in class assignments, out of class assignments, and a final project.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 12. Lab fee: $25.  Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"Color touches on nearly every aspect of life on earth. It is used to elicit the widest range of emotions and feelings by quickly influencing cellular activity or raising or lowering blood pressure or triggering wakefulness and sleep. Color plays a vital role in mating and reproduction for most life forms and a central role in symbolizing the aspirations of nation states, corporations, and even the humble neighborhood grade school. In the realm of the visual arts color has reigned supreme since the earliest cave paintings and in the mundane material world, color is used universally to influence the buying decisions of everything from Ferraris to Fruit Loops.  A theory can be defined as a well substantiated explanation of some aspect of the natural world based on a body of facts that have been repeatedly confirmed through observation and experiment, and a mystery is defined as something that baffles our understanding and cannot be explained. This course will move between modern scientific color theory and the mysterious world of color mixing, interaction and design. We will study historic and modern pigments and their uses and applications across a broad range of the visual arts and will devote substantial class time to the design and execution of color design problems.  The five goals of this course are: to develop a solid working knowledge of scientific color theory;  to develop significant skills in seeing, mixing and organizing color through studio exercises and assignments;  to produce a body of work that you are proud of; to develop constructive and helpful critiquing skills; to permanently enliven and enrich the way you move through the visual world in a way that invites you to share the mystery of color with others.  Class time will be divided into lecture, critique, studio exercises, and explanation of assignments due for the following class critique.   Students will be evaluated on the quality of the required assignments presented for critiques as well as their class attendance and attentive participation in all aspects of the studio meetings. This class is an excellent option for students who are interested in the visual arts, but also will have value for students with a wide range of interests and backgrounds outside of the arts. Prior experience in drawing, painting, or other visual arts is not a necessary prerequisite for the course.

Level: Introductory-Intermediate. Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $100.  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS"
"In Aspects of the Novel, E.M. Forster differentiated between “story” and “plot,” defining a story as “a narrative of events arranged in their time sequence” and plot as also a narrative of events but with “the emphasis falling on causality.” The king died and then the queen died. That’s a story. The king died and then the queen died of grief. That’s a plot. Of course, not everyone agrees. Grace Paley claimed, “Plot is nothing; the plot is simply a timeline.” Edna O’Brien offered a blunter assessment: “F**** the plot! That is for precocious school boys.”  Many creative writing classrooms have embraced O’Brien’s denigration of plot. When plot is dealt with, if it is dealt with at all, it is done as a means to an end. And yet it is plot and hang-ups about it that often prevent developing fiction writers from finishing promising stories. Inspiration only carries you so far. As Toni Morrison said, “Art appears natural and elegant only as a result of constant practice and awareness of its formal structures.” And so this is what we will do–spend ten weeks examining the structure of short stories that present a range of strategies for plot. But we won’t stop there. Students will write and workshop three of their own short stories, intentionally experimenting with plotted and “plotless” structures. Students will not be evaluated  on the quality of their short stories, as judging that is often quite arbitrary. We will employ a labor-based grading system that puts emphasis on your engagement with assignments and participation in group writing sessions designed to help students create a sustainable writing practice. 

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: Prior work in literature/creative writing or a discussion with the instructor about where they are in their writing.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"Thermodynamics is the area of physics concerned with the behavior of very large collections of particles. Examples include the water molecules in glass of water, the electrons in a wire, or the photons given off by a light bulb. Thermodynamics studies properties of collections of particles that are largely independent of the particles' detail, for example, the tendency for heat to flow from a hot object to a cold one.

This course will begin with a treatment of the first law of thermodynamics and basic thermal physics. Topics to be covered include the conservation of energy, heat and work, the ideal gas, the equipartition of energy, heat capacities, and latent heat. We will then move to the second law of thermodynamics, beginning with a statistical definition of entropy. This will require learning some combinatorics (a mathematical technique for counting) and approximation methods for working with very large numbers. This statistical approach will enable us to understand the origin of the second law of thermodynamics, and will lead naturally to statistical definitions of temperature, pressure, and chemical potential. We will then turn our attention to two broad areas of application. The first of these is heat engines and refrigerators, including heat pumps. The second set of applications involve free energy and chemical equilibrium. Depending on student interest, we will cover batteries and fuel cells, phase transitions, adiabatic lapse rates in meteorology, and nitrogen fixation. Thermodynamics is a broadly applicable field of physics, and so this course should be of relevance to students whose interests are in almost any area of science or engineering, as well as those who wish to gain a general introduction to a field that is one of the pillars of modern physical science. Evaluation will be based on weekly problem sets and a final research paper, presentation, or lab project.

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisites: Calculus II and either a college-level physics or chemistry class. Course Limit: 20.  Lab Fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: QR ES"
"What is the first thing that comes to mind when you hear the word, India? Bollywood? Curry? Poverty? The way we encounter a place/space and form an opinion about it has a lot to do with the kind of popular cultural representations that float around with the power to perpetuate (or dispel) stereotypes. Literature, for example, offers a fertile ground to explore the idea of a place like India. Therefore, this class will be your literary introduction to India in its diversity. Students will be evaluated based on class participation, along with written assignments and a multimodal presentation. So, by producing well-thought-out and carefully researched responses, movie reviews, presentations, and more, you will get to engage with various aspects of India. We will be studying works by Jhumpa Lahiri, William Dalrymple, Anita Desai, among others. These literary texts and additional materials like films, food, advertisements, and newspaper reports will be a means to study the politics of history, location, image, identity, diaspora, gender, and (mis)representations. The main purpose of this class is to help you use literature to develop your own idea of this place called India.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: none. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: none.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"This is a course in conducting scientific research and practicing scientific communication through writing and oral presentation. Each student will spend the term working on one research project that is part of broader ongoing research by COA faculty or community-based work in the MDI region. Topics for student projects will be tied to existing projects and in collaboration with researchers, educators, and community members. The projects may follow a wide range of formats and should connect to student interests. Some examples of possible projects include: investigating seasonal variation in surface water and groundwater quality and quantity, identifying the resource needs of high school educators teaching data literacy based on geoscience datasets, interpreting the paleoecology of a location based on a sediment core, exploration of geochemical reactions, analyzing levels of contamination in the environment, or the review and synthesis of the state of EPA standards for the acceptable limits for chemicals found in drinking water. After choosing a project, students will ask questions of existing data, review existing literature, design the next phase of a project, collect observations, and make interpretations based on those observations. Each week, students will practice writing and peer review of project components: proposal preparation, literature review, methodology description, presentation of results or products, data visualization, interpretation and synthesis connected to prior work, and potential future work. Class time will be used for lectures, meetings with visiting collaborators or field trips, student presentations, and writing instruction and revision. Students will be evaluated based on their weekly written work, their ability to meet milestones throughout the project work, and their final dissemination (report and oral presentation) of their project.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced.  Prerequisites: At least one prior ES course, and permission of instructor.  Class limit: 16.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES, W"
"This course explores possibilities for transformative change across local and global food systems.  The course centers on the questions: What would it take to ensure access to healthy, safe, affordable, culturally appropriate foods for all people? The first part of the course critically examines capitalist food systems with particular attention to the ways culture, politics, and economics shape our interactions with food. Through readings and exercises, we explore issues such as nutrition, worker safety, contested agricultural and land use policies, hunger, and environmental and community health. The second part of the course examines case studies of transformative food movements around the world, from the Zero Hunger programs in Belo Horizonte, Brazil, to La Via Campesina global campaign for agrarian reform. We focus particularly on food sovereignty and agroecology movements. The final third of the course focuses on transformative work in Maine and at COA. Students take multiple field trips to participate in local movements and to learn about their philosophies, objectives, and activities. By the end of the course, students will be able to analyze how power shapes food systems and articulate a theory of change for addressing a food systems problem of their choice. Students are evaluated based on participation in class discussions and field trips, a series of reflection papers, and a final project including a paper and an audio-visual presentation.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 20.  Lab fee: none.  Meets the following degree requirements:  HS"
"This course introduces you to the native and ornamental shrubs and trees of Mount Desert Island. Lectures will cover basics of plant taxonomy and forest ecology focusing on the dominant woody plant species of the region. Laboratory and field sessions will involve the identification of woody plants and an introduction to the major woody plant habitats of the island. The course is designed to teach botany and plant taxonomy for students interested in natural history/ecology, forestry, and landscape design. Evaluations are based on  class participation, weekly field/lab quizzes, a plant collection, and term project.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Recommended: some background in Botany, Ecology. Offered every year. Class limit: 16.  Lab fee: $40.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES"
"Insects are the dominant animals in nearly all terrestrial ecosystems. However, in places like Maine, their abundance, diversity, and impact are not always apparent to the casual observer. This is not so in the tropics! Nowhere else are insects as large, showy, and numerous. Costa Rica is home to at least 300,000 species of insects, approximately one third of all described insect species. We will travel to and observe insects in a Caribbean slope rainforest, pre-montane forest, montane cloud forest, Pacific slope dry forest, Pacific wet forest, and Pacific beach/marine communities. Non-travel days will typically consist of early to late-morning field time, afternoon lectures or discussions followed by early evening to late night field time.

Students will spend extensive time in the field learning and practicing insect identification to the order and family level, observing insect behavior, and studying interspecies interactions. Reading and discussion topics will include insect conservation and declines, relationships between insects and plants, humans, and other animals, and control of agricultural and medical insect pest species. Particular attention will be paid to leafcutter ants, army ants, and other ecologically and culturally significant species. The course schedule will complement the content taught in Introduction to Tropical Field Ecology and will be reinforced through assignments in the Field Journal course. Introductory Entomology is helpful but not a prerequisite.

This course is part of a three-credit expeditionary program in neotropical field ecology. Students must enroll in all three courses.

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: Co-enrollment in ES3099 Introduction to Tropical Field Ecology and MD1032 The Art and Practice of the Natural History Field Journal, and permission of instructor. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: $1,600 (for all three courses). Meets the following degree requirements: ES."
"This course traces variations in the social, legal, political, and economic status of women in Asia, Africa, and Europe from antiquity to about 1500. Students will examine letters, diaries, songs, artwork and artifacts, court documents, poems, essays, and fiction primarily by and about women. Students will also consider such questions as: Why and to what extent did women in some parts of the world—China, southern India, Japan, Catalonia—experience relative freedom? What were women’s attitudes toward sexuality, men, children, religion, love, work, magic, and education? How was gender negotiated, with female identity in girlhood, adolescence, and adulthood established or modified, within various sociocultural contexts? What were the achievements and accomplishments of women during these early periods, whether they managed households and property; wandered the land as minstrels; practiced medicine; worked at court, in the religious life, in the visual and performing arts, or as political leaders such as pharaohs, priests, and emperors. Students will be evaluated on the basis of class participation, two short papers, and one substantial essay.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 15  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS."
"This is a course in Ornithology in the traditional sense: a literature and lab-based assessment of the evolution, taxonomy, and structure of Class Aves. We will begin with an over-view of the evolutionary diversification of birds, discuss unique adaptations that have allowed this group of vertebrates to spread across the entire planet, and then examine details of physiology and anatomy, including reproduction, developmental biology and feeding and locomotion. We will explore both current and historical literature in bird behavior, with occasional guest-lectures from some authors of papers we discuss. A strong interest in taxonomy is assumed. Labs will include dissection, some microscopy and observation of behavior. Evaluation will be based on class participation, a mid-term and a final exam as well as an in-class presentation on a specific family of birds.

Level: Advanced. Prerequisites: Ecology, extensive field-work in Ornithology, and permission of instructor. Class Limit: 3.  Lab Fee: none."
"This tutorial is designed for those students with prior teaching experience who wish to deepen their understanding of experiential learning theory, its practical applications in a variety of contexts, and research and program evaluation methods.  The tutorial will require concurrent attendance in Experiential Education class meetings and fieldtrips, and in addition, a once-weekly meeting with other students in this tutorial to discuss readings, research methods, and individual research projects.  Students will lead discussions, review literature, conduct a case study, and plan, teach, and evaluate a learning experience offered to Experiential Education students.  Students will be evaluated on the following learning objectives: comprehension of theory, research, and practices of experiential education; comprehension of the literature in a subfield of experiential education; ability to identify, analyze, and synthesize a body of literature; ability to assess feasibility, validity, and reliability of different research methods for different research questions; ability to carry out a case study; and ability to plan and teach one Experiential Education class meeting in an area of their expertise.  

Level: Advanced. Prerequisites: Permission of instructor. Class limit: 6.  Lab fee: $30."
"Students will build on their previous studies in West African and Afro-Cuban percussion music to elevate their rhythmic skills and knowledge of these musical cultures. In this advanced class students will learn to utilize rhythmic notation and will focus on developing a performance for the COA community. In addition, students will create a group composition. Assessment will be based on attendance, a final test, the end of term performance and their group composition.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: World Percussion or Samba Percussion Ensemble or permission of instructor. It is beneficial but not necessary for students to have their own djembe. Class limit: 2. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"A social anthropologist by training, Amitav Ghosh has been one of the foremost South Asian fiction writers. His fiction is grounded in and guided by historical events like the violence of 1984, the Partition, and the Opium Wars. The Hungry Tide (2004) seems like a departure then, dealing with the issue of climate refugees. Or rather, it was a beginning. Since then, Ghosh has been a strong proponent of understanding climate and writing about the disaster that will befall us and future generations if we do nothing about it. 

Given the immediacy of climate change, the tutorial will focus on two of his more recent works, The Great Derangement (2016) and Junglenama (2021). Both texts vary in genre, the former a work of non-fiction and the latter graphic prose, and thus approach climate change in different yet effective ways. We will engage with these genres and the themes they evoke through discussions, response papers, an online article, and a final essay. Since this tutorial is a continuation of a college seminar that meets the writing requirement, a significant chunk of time will be spent on the process of feedback, revision, and reflection."
"Since the turn of the millennium, research into the science of contemplative practices—such as meditation, qigong, taiji, and yoga, among others—has exploded. The intersection of these practices with fields such as cognitive and affective neuroscience, cognitive and developmental psychology, integrative medicine, comparative religion, education, and sustainability science examine the impacts on mental and physical health, socio-emotional learning, and a less consumption-driven future. This tutorial will survey those practices supported by evidence from recent research. The application of these practices have similarly flourished in mindfulness-based interventions and programs in therapeutic settings and schooling from early childhood to adult education and professional programs including counseling, medicine, law, social work, and teacher education. Pedagogical approaches apply to classroom contexts as well as informal settings such as environmental education and include diverse approaches such as collaborative poetry and contemplative photography. This tutorial engages students in a review of the research literature in parallel with micro-phenomenological inquiry through sustained individual or group practice with one or two practices and journaling. Students will also spend a substantial portion of the tutorial engaging in a variety of contemplative practices with area teachers while working on research or education projects. Evaluation will include an annotated bibliography, synthesis of a practice-based micro-phenomenological journal, and a research or education project proposal focused on a practice of interest.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: a prior intermediate education, neuroscience, philosophy, or psychology course; recommended prerequisite: some prior experience with a contemplative practice. Class Limit: 7. Lab fee: None."
"This class concentrates on the theory and practice of poetry and short fiction, though there will also be a place for ""Starting Your Novel"" students to finish up.  Our goal is to develop the skills of verbal craftsmanship and self-criticism.  Class meetings combine the analysis and critique of individual students' writing with the discussions of published works by other writers.  We also frequently discuss matters of standards, the creative process, and the situation of the writer in the contemporary world.  Students are expected to submit one piece each week, to participate in class response to fellow writers, to make revisions on all work, and to contribute their best pieces to the printed class anthology at the end of the term.

Level:  Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: Permission of Instructor. Class limit: 5. Lab fee: none. Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"Parasites live on the surface or within the bodies of a host, feeding off host fluids or tissues.  Because parasites do not directly kill the host, a parasitic infection may persist indefinitely, sometimes decades in the case of long-lived hosts.  Parasites include tiny, single-celled organisms as well as worms that can reach many meters in length.  This course will explore the biology of parasites, with a focus on those species that affect humans and domestic animals.  Some of the most prevalent human diseases, such as malaria and schistosomiasis, are caused by parasites.  Students will learn about the evolution o f complex life histories and the various means of evading the host’s immune system employed by parasites.  We will meet twice a week for lecture and discussion of reading from the primary literature as well as the popular literature.  Students will take turns presenting material on specific issues and examples they have research.  Evaluation based on quality of contribution o class discussions, presentation, and several short written assignments.

Level: Advanced.  Pre-requisite: Invertebrate Zoology and signature of instructor. Class limit: 6.  Lab fee: none."
"This winter, students will collaboratively research and stage a production of César Alvarez and the Lisps' Futurity (2015), a work of musical theater about two people dreaming of a technological utopia during one of the darkest periods of American history. The musical looks back to the Civil War to raise contemporary questions about the role of technology in visions for liberation. In the Futurity Pit Orchestra Tutorial, students will learn, rehearse, and perform the music for the show. Student will gain experience surrounding the nuts and bolts of musical theater production and will have the opportunity to perform a run of shows as a member of a pit orchestra. The course is pass/fail by default and students will be assessed on the diligence with which they rehearse and perform the music for the production. This tutorial will include in a run of performances at the end of the Winter term.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 6.  Lab fee: None."
"This tutorial offers small group instruction in a defined musical or media discipline.  It involves at least one 1 1/2 hour weekly meeting with the instructor, and independent or group time of at least 8-10 hours weekly, with more time for advanced work.  Requirements include an end of term project or performance. 

Level: Variable.  Offered upon demand. Lab fee: $20. Meets the following degree requirement: ADS"
"Group theory is an area of mathematics that is concerned with symmetry. In this context, an object or system is said to be symmetric if it is unchanged after an action is performed on it. Examples of such actions include rotations, reflections, and permutations. Objects' symmetries can be classified by the types of actions that leave them unchanged. A set of actions, together with rules for how those actions behave when combined, are (loosely speaking) what mathematicians refer to as a group. Group theory has applications in physics, chemistry, and pure and applied mathematics.

A group is an example of an algebraic structure, which (again loosely speaking) is a set together with a collection of rules for combining pairs of elements of that set. Algebraic structures are classified by the properties of the rules for combining pairs of elements. In addition to groups, other common algebraic structures include rings and fields. The broad study of the properties of different algebraic structures is known as ""abstract algebra"".

This course is an introduction to group theory and will also serve as a springboard to the further study of abstract algebra. Topics to be covered will include: learning to identify groups using group axioms; Cayley diagrams; examples of different classes of groups, including abelian, cyclic, dihedral, and permutation groups; subgroups and Lagrange's theorem; products and quotients; group homomorphisms; the fundamental theorem for abelian groups; and Sylow theory. Other topics and examples will depend on student interest.

This course will be taught in a seminar style; students will frequently be asked to prepare examples and proofs for discussion in class and to work collaboratively on problems, both in and out of class meetings. Evaluation will be based on problem sets and active and collaborative class participation.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: Calculus II (or the equivalent), Linear Algebra and Proofs and Mathematical Structures are both strongly recommended, and permission of instructor. Class limit: 5.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: QR."
"This course is an introduction to mathematical structures, proof techniques, and the language and style of formal mathematics. Topics to be covered include: intuitive and direct proofs, sets and functions, induction, logic, the contrapositive, and proof by contradiction. Additionally, this course aims to introduce students to some of the key elements of higher mathematics, and so, as time permits, we will cover introductory topics from areas such as number theory, topology, real analysis, and group theory. Throughout the course we will emphasize clear mathematical exposition and methods of proof. In addition to gaining an understanding of the topics listed above, students who complete this course will be able to: read and understand mathematical exposition; think critically as mathematicians and present convincing arguments; and read and write formal proofs. This class will help prepare students for further advanced study in mathematics and related fields. It will also be of value to those who wish to explore the logical structure of mathematics, gain increased facility with abstract mathematical thought, or sharpen analytic and critical reasoning skills. This course will be taught in a seminar style; students will frequently be asked to prepare proofs and examples for discussion in class and to work collaboratively on problems. Evaluation will be based on problem sets and active and collaborative class participation.

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisites: Calculus II and permission of instructor.  Class limit: 5.  Lab Fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: QR."
"This introductory writing tutorial focuses on writing as process, grammar, speaking, and poster or power-point presentations. The selected readings examine different genres—narration, description, definition, comparison and contrast, and analysis. Students will write several short papers and one longer paper. Where possible, those papers will be based on assignments in other courses. In addition, students will prepare either a power point or poster presentation on a topic of their choice. Each week students will meet as a group for 1.5 hours with the professor and 3 hours with their individual tutor. Evaluation will be based on the overall improvement in their writing, the effectiveness of the power point or poster presentation, class participation, their commitment, and the quality of the work they do with their tutor. This course carries only institutional credit.

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: Permission of instructor. Class limit: 5. Lab fee: none."
"This tutorial is designed to improve both writing and speaking skills and is customized to each student’s individual needs.  In addition to writing papers for other courses students are enrolled in, several short papers will be assigned so students are always writing and rewriting. Most classes will begin with a free write, followed by work on reading comprehension, vocabulary, and grammar. Students will meet with a writing tutor for a minimum of 2 hours weekly. Evaluations are based on student participation in and preparedness for weekly meeting and conferences, essays, and a final essay examination. This course carries only institutional credit.

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: Permission of instructor. Class limit: 5.  Lab fee: none."
"Educational programs strive to improve access, conditions, and quality of education for a variety of individuals, groups, and communities.  Not-for-profit organizations and educational institutions target a variety of objectives, not limited to the following: Broaden access to early childhood education; strengthen health and nutrition education; prevent school violence; foster youth empowerment and resilience; support and advocate for LGBTQI students; promote adult literacy; raise awareness of domestic violence; facilitate integration of immigrants and language minorities; provide resources and assistance for migrant workers and their families; innovate museum-based art education; integrate garden- or farm-based education; individualize teacher education; collaborate with schools for leadership development.  This course pivots around the central questions: How do we know that a program is achieving its intended outcomes?  What processes facilitate or impede the program’s objectives? Students will learn the principles and practices of qualitative research methods to determine whether and how well an educational program accomplishes its mission through collaborating on the evaluation of a regional education project. The major objective of the course is to develop skills in document analysis, participant-observation, questionnaire design, interviewing, and qualitative data analysis. Students will work closely and extensively (over the course of two months) with an existing program and undertake all phases of a program evaluation: planning, data collection, data analysis, and reporting.  Evaluation will be based on class participation, four analytic memos, an oral presentation on a program evaluation design for an individual project, and a co-authored draft report of a program evaluation.  

Level: Advanced. Prerequisites: Prior coursework in education, ethnography, or statistics is recommended. Class limit: 5.  Lab fee: $30. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"This tutorial will improve students’ writing ability and introduce them not only to writing academic papers in the sciences but also writing for the lay public. An essential component of this course is writing text for exhibits for the George B. Dorr Natural History Museum proposed. The course also involves learning to write an abstract, literature review, critiques, technical reports, and text for a poster. All students will present a poster or power point at the end of the term. In addition to working with the instructor, students will often work on the content of their writing and grammar with tutors in the writing center. As we develop texts for some exhibits, we will also work with museum staff. 

Evaluation will be based on the students' participation in class discussions and peer review sessions, quality of power-point and/or poster presentations, effectiveness in revising writing to meet the standards of the instructor and, if appropriate, the research sponsor, and writing a piece specifically for the lay public. At the end of the term, the students should hand in a portfolio containing all drafts as well as a printout of the power point and/or poster.

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: Permission of instructor.  Class limit: 5.  Lab fee: none.  Meets the following degree requirements: W."
"This tutorial not only expands on the concepts studied in Advanced Composition and/or Communicating Science but also gives students the opportunity to write several short papers on topics of interest in the sciences or to use the 10 weeks to develop, write, and rewrite an extended scientific essay or report.  Through reading journal articles, scientific reports, and extended scientific essays, students will gain a better understanding of writing concisely, cohesively, and gracefully in the sciences. They will also become more cognizant of how to convey complex scientific information to the lay public—communication that aids the public in understanding the importance of scientific research, its applicability to current issues and problems, and the need for public funding of science research as opposed to funding from private entities. Students will use  Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace and U. of Chicago Guide to Communicating Science as reference texts as well as read other material gleaned from various texts, journals, and essay collections.
Evaluation will be based on the student’s ability to substantively revise and to offer constructive criticism in peer reviews. 

Level: Advanced. Prerequisites: Permission of instructor.  Class limit: 4.  Lab fee: none. Meets the following degree requirements: W."
"This course offers a broad introduction to food and farm policy in the United States. Food and farm policy encompasses laws, regulations, norms, decisions, and actions by governments and other institutions that influence food production, distribution, access, consumption, and recovery. This course focuses on the policy process and two major policy tools: the U.S. Farm Bill and U.S. Dietary Guidelines for Americans.

The course begins with an overview of the evolution of food and farming technology in the United States. Students are then introduced to the concepts, institutions, and stakeholders that influence farm and food policy, and examine examples of some of the most salient contemporary issues. Topics covered include: food production and the environment; farm-based biodiversity conservation; international food and agricultural trade; food processing, manufacturing, and retail industries; food safety; dietary and nutrition guidelines; food labeling and advertising; food and biotechnology; food waste and recovery; food advocacy and activism; and food insecurity and the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP). Through case studies and exercises students examine the policymaking process at the local, state, and federal level and learn to evaluate various policy options. Finally, the course compares and contrasts international perspectives on farm and food policies and programs. Students are evaluated based on participation in class discussions, a series of op-ed essays, in-class briefs and debates, and a policy recommendation report on the upcoming U.S. Farm Bill.

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisites: Must have taken at least one course in food systems, economics, or global politics.  Class limit: 24.  Lab fee: none.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"This course will examine essential questions about how groups function, whether the group is a committee involved in institutional governance, a class of adolescents, or a cohort of business colleagues. Readings, activities, and assignments will weigh traditional and alternative conceptions of leadership, power, authority, community, diversity, membership, and exclusion. Students will engage in case discussions, writing (including autobiography and creative writing), and research activities. A major component of the course will be the observation and analysis of a group (e.g., in a community organization, business, or school). The final paper will be the creation and analysis of a case. Evaluation will be based on class participation, responses to readings, facilitation of a case discussion, an autobiographical essay, a short story, reports of observations, and the final paper. This course is graded with credit/no credit only. Students will be expected to elect credit/no credit grading, with special arrangement to be made for those needing to take it for a grade.

Level: Intermediate.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: $50.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS ED"
"The practice of social dreaming has a long history in philosophical thinking, stretching back to Tao Yuanming and Plato. What constitutes a perfect or ideal society? Or, if no such place is possible, what makes for a well-functioning society? Likewise, what constitutes a terrible society? What kind of places and spaces do we want to avoid? These are important questions for human ecologists to ask as we seek to improve our relationships with our natural, social, and technological environments. To explore questions of imaginary, ideal, and flawed places, this course studies the concepts of utopia and dystopia across a range of philosophical, political, and literary writings. Although we will focus our attention on theoretical literature, we will read one novel and several short stories.

Additional course questions include: What motivates us to envision utopias and dystopias? Does political philosophy require a utopian vision? What do utopias and dystopias tell us about social fears, anxieties, and hopes? Are utopia and dystopia inherently connected? What theoretical questions spring from the utopia/dystopia binary?  We will read texts such as, Plato’s Republic, Thomas More’s Utopia, Rokeya Hossain’s Sultana’s Dream, Marx and Engels’ Communist Manifesto, Elizabeth Grosz’s The Time of Architecture; William Godwin’s Enquiry Concerning Political Justice, José Estaban Muñoz’s Cruising Utopia, Sigmund Freud’s Civilization and Its Discontents, Octavia Butler’s Parable of the Sower, Ursula K. LaGuin’s The Ones Who Walk Away From Omelas, Laozi's Tao Te Ching, Hannah Arendt’s The Origins of Totalitarianism, Alex Zamalin’s Black Utopia, and selections from The Utopian Reader by Gregory Claeys and Lyman Tower Sargent.  

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: none.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"In this course, we will explore the phylogenetic, morphological, and ecological diversity of vertebrates within an evolutionary framework. Using a comparative approach, we will explore the diversity of major vertebrate groups, with a focus on local representatives; interpret major evolutionary transitions; and identify the relationships between structure and function. We will practice developing hypotheses about vertebrate ecology and evolution, considering morphological, behavioral, ecological, and life history traits. The laboratory component will be a mixture of work with museum specimens, dissections, and fieldwork. We will focus on nomenclature of anatomy, standard necropsy and identification techniques, including use of taxonomic keys. Fieldwork will introduce methods to survey and monitor vertebrates, including standard capture, handling, and marking techniques. The laboratory is scheduled with early field mornings in mind. Days we are not conducting field work, we will meet later for lab. There is a required weekend field trip. This class involves a fair amount of reading and memorization to help develop a strong foundation in the taxonomy of vertebrates, as this course is a prerequisite for other advanced vertebrate courses. Assessments include quizzes, a lab/field journal, a practical, and a final written “dream project” on a vertebrate ecology and evolution question of your choice.

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: ES1054 Biology: Form and Function and a course in ecology. Class limit: 11.  Lab fee: $75.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES."
"This course will be an in depth exploration of contemporary flashpoint issues involving the design, administration, and regulation of elections for public office in the United States. We will take up a series of case studies by examining their history, the stakeholders involved, and the pros and cons of the relevant alternative reform measures that have been proposed. Topics covered in a given term will vary based on changing external factors such as the timing of elections as well as student interests. Students enrolling in the class should expect to be contacted by the instructor prior to the start of the term to discuss areas of interest. Likely areas that may be covered include: campaign finance reform, gerrymandering, instant runoff voting, election technologies, voter suppression, alternative governmental models, the electoral college, party primaries, campaign communication regulation, government funding of elections, nationalization of election standards, etc..  This advanced seminar will emphasize collaborative work, discussion, and debate. We will ground our work as a group in tangible solutions that address existing problems in how elections are conducted in the United States. While the emphasis of the class will be on the US context, we will often draw on international case studies as comparative reference points to assist in evaluating possible policy alternatives.   While familiarity with the US political system is not a requirement for this class, students should have completed some previous coursework in areas related to law, policy, government, or politics (domestic or international).  Students will be evaluated based on their participation and engagement with class discussion, various short in-class presentations, short form individual response papers, and a longer form research and advocacy project due at the end of the term.

Level: Advanced. Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 8. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: HS."
"This course will introduce students to the fundamentals of visual art in general and drawing, in particular. While focusing on perception, composition, line and materiality, students will draw from objects, the human figure, interior/exterior spaces, and from imagined sources. We will work with a variety of materials and challenge the limits of scale, by investigating the navigation of landscapes as accumulative, drawn lines. We will develop strategies to visualize histories, topographies, individual perspectives and inner worlds embedded in landscape. Regular class critiques will assist in developing evaluation skills of work in progress, and in analyzing formal composition principles. Assigned readings and one research project, contextualizing work and life of an assigned artist, will be a segment of this course. Students will be expected to maintain an 'active' sketchbook. Students will be evaluated based on class participation, competition of projects, and their artist presentation.

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: $40.  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS"
"The term ""waste"" has varied definitions; it can suggest excess material not put to use, garbage, time or objects that are not made productive or useful, and that which is thrown away. Waste is both a verb and a noun, and the term often carries moral or ethical undertones; time should not be wasted, neither should food nor material goods, and of course, life itself should not be wasted. Waste should be reduced or transformed through consumption or recycling. Waste can occasion disgust and outrage, but even if less acknowledged, also fascination, desire and pleasure.  Time spent idle is often time considered ""wasted."" Waste is also often understood as destructive and as the product of destruction. At the same time, waste can also be a necessary by product of its opposites. Psychoanalysis has drawn attention to feces association with gold and the notion of the gift of waste in the formation of subjectivity. Political economy, postcolonial studies, anthropology  and feminist theory have all addressed histories of abjection, notions of excrement, disposable populations, and the ways in which humans have dealt with literal waste and those materials and lives that become understood as waste. In this regard, understandings of waste have been central for notions of value, productivity, desire, cleanliness and filth, inside and outside, and the place of difference. In this course, we will examine some of the varied ways in which waste has been understood - in terms of political economy, political theory, postcolonial studies and feminist theory, addressing waste in terms of identity, the natural environment, value, and the formation of what counts as human. Readings will include texts by Karl Marx, Frantz Fanon, Georges Bataille, Julia Kristeva, Sigmund Freud, Dominque Laporte, Mary Douglas, Jacques Lacan, Norman O. Brown, Sophia Stamatopoulou-Robbins, William Rathje and Cullen Murphy, Kathleen Millar, Hannah Arendt, Carl Schmitt, Kevin Bales, Paul Ricoeur, Ranjana Khanna, and Françoise Vergès.  Students will be evaluated based on attendance, in-class participation, reading responses, and two short analytical essays. 

Level: Intermediate/Advanced.  Prerequisites: none.  Class limit: 10.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"What happens to us when we walk into a movie theater? What are our expectations? To what degree are we prepared to be challenged or confronted by something new or different? Of approximately 5000 films produced yearly worldwide, fewer than 5% are given a general U.S. theatrical release. Of these 250, fewer than 30 come from outside the Hollywood system. There are wonderful, unique movies being made every day that most of us will never know exist. This is largely due to entrenched ideas of how to play it commercially ""safe,"" but also has a great deal to do with a national isolationism which Hollywood films support and perpetuate. What are filmmakers in other countries focusing their attentions on? What stylistic choices are they making? How does one find out about these other films, let alone see them? In this class we will watch movies made within the last twelve years in Austria, Belgium, Burkina Faso, Canada, China, Greece, Hungary, Iran, Russia, Taiwan, Thailand and many other countries--films made by directors the rest of the world acknowledges as masters but who are virtually unknown in the U. S. Critical and theoretical essays from a variety of sources will offer detailed readings on the individual films as well as give a clear picture of how Hollywood functions to silence other voices and the ramifications of these practices on world finance and culture. Among topics covered will be: new media, the digital revolution, the changing face of copyright law, how movies can mask cultural assumptions and reinforce stereotypes or reveal new ways of seeing/perceiving. Evaluation will be based on class participation, weekly response papers, and a final paper/presentation.

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: none.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: $45.  Meets the following degree requirements: AD"
"This course investigates an ecological design approach that centers on water and water systems as a means of achieving community development goals in an equitable and environmentally responsive manner. Participants will investigate contemporary water challenges facing communities (the combination of which varies from location to location): scarcity, poor water quality, downstream ecological impacts associated with processes of urbanization, climate change and sea level rise, and others. We will examine and reframe these challenges through the lens of the “hydro-social,” a term geographers use to describe how cultural perspectives shape our relationships to water (in other words, water is more than simply H2O). Through use of case study project examples, we will explore how combinations of age-old (premodern and vernacular) water systems design strategies and cutting-edge approaches can lead to projects of greater resilience, ecological responsiveness, beauty, and civic identity than more conventional, engineered, “end-of-pipe” solutions. We will lastly explore how these strategies might apply to a case study watershed that we will investigate in the last portion of the class. The course does not require previous experience in design; rather it is intended to engender greater awareness of how systems-based design thinking can allow us to address contemporary hydro-social challenges holistically. Evaluations will be based on participation and sustained engagement with course content; responses to this material in the form of short, illustrated essays that combine written narratives with simple diagrams, photographs, and sketches; analysis of case study projects through a framework we will introduce in the first part of the class; and a “final synthesis” assignment that involves speculating about the application of strategies and approaches discussed throughout the class to the case study watershed.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 16.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: AD."
"In this course students will learn the basic field and quantitative methods used to characterize watersheds. The course will focus mainly on watersheds of Mt Desert Island and some of the larger rivers in Maine and will build upon foundational concepts in Earth Science. The course will feature field, lab, and lecture components. Students will conduct geomorphic mapping (field and GIS), surveying, stream discharge measurements, pebble counts, and other common tools and methods to conduct a term-long field study of multiple island watersheds. Upon returning from the field, students will use their data to calculate flows and sediment loads associated with less frequent flood events. Large magnitude flow events tend to shape steam channels and have implications for human infrastructure and intertidal zone dynamics. Students will be evaluated based on weekly assignments, quizzes, presentations, and the term-long project. Students will work in teams to complete a basin-wide study of one of the island watersheds of interest to community partners for long-term monitoring. The field project will culminate in a written report and presentation. They will work on their project report throughout the term with opportunities for peer review and revision. It is strongly recommended that students have taken high school math courses (algebra and geometry), at least 1 introductory Earth Science course, and are comfortable using Excel.

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisites: HS2020 Introductory GIS.  Class limit: 16.  Lab fee: $100.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES, QR."
"Loren Eisely once remarked, ""If there is magic on this planet, it is contained in water."" Eisely's observation is an underlying premise of this course - that there is something very special about moving water. This course is taught in a seminar format in which students will read and discuss ecological, historical, sociological, political and legal aspects of river conservation and watershed protection. Special emphasis is placed on understanding the policy issues surrounding dams, river protection, and watershed planning. In conjunction with readings and class discussions, students will use a term-long study of a local stream to learn about the threats facing rivers in the United States and the legal and policy mechanisms for addressing these threats. In addition, the class will take an extended field trip to western Massachusetts to gain first-hand knowledge of the tremendous impact river manipulation can have on a social and ecological landscape. We will spend time looking at historically industrialized and now nationally protected rivers in the region. Through weekly excursions on Maine rivers, students will also develop skills to enable them to paddle a tandem canoe in intermediate whitewater. Evaluation will be based on problem sets, role-playing exercises, contribution to the class, short essays, and paddling skills. Weekly excursions to area rivers entail special scheduling constraints as we will be in the field all day on Fridays. 

Level: Intermediate.  Prerequisite: Signature of instructor.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $150. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"Wilderness has been the clarion call for generations of environmentalists. In a letter in support of the Wilderness Act, writer Wallace Stegner characterized the importance of wilderness as an essential ""part of the geography of hope."" That single phrase and the current controversy surrounding the concept of wilderness provide the central focus of our explorations of wilderness in western lands. This course examines the question of wilderness from multiple perspectives in the hopes of providing an understanding of both the concept and real spaces that constitute wilderness. Through conversations with wilderness managers, field work, and experience in federally designated wilderness areas in National Parks, National Forests, Wildlife Refuges and on BLM lands, the course will also examine what ""wilderness management"" means on the ground in the varied landscapes of the western United States. In this context, we look at historical and contemporary acco unts of the value of wilderness, ecological and cultural arguments for wilderness, and the legal and policy difficulties of ""protecting"" wilderness. Considerable time is spent evaluating current criticisms of the wilderness idea and practice. The class will culminate at a week-long national conference celebrating the 50th anniversary of the Wilderness Act. The 50th Anniversary National Wilderness Conference provides an incomparable opportunity for students to hear from and interact with federal management agencies, academics, recreation experts, and environmental advocacy organizations. Presenting their final course work at this conference will also give students an opportunity to share their ideas and to receive valuable feedback from this sophisticated and well-informed audience of wilderness experts. Classwork emphasizes hands-on service-learning projects as well as reading, writing, and theoretical discussions. Students will be evaluated on journal entrie s, contributions to the class discussions, response rapers, engagement in field activities, questions in the field, and contributions to group work.  This course will be integrated with and requires co-enrollment in Reading the West and Ecology and Natural History of the West.

Level:  Intermediate/Advanced.  Prerequisites: Ecology, Our Public Lands, and permission of instructor and concurrent enrollment.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: none.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"This course is designed to introduce students to how, and why, we study and manage wildlife populations. We will discuss the socio-political background and establishment of the North American Model of Wildlife Conservation, considering its biases and limitations. Using a variety of readings, case studies, and hands-on activities, we will explore the ecological processes and common conservation management tools that underlie wildlife management. We will apply our knowledge throughout the term through the investigation of different wildlife populations found on MDI, in collaboration with the National Park Service and other agencies. Therefore, there is a strong field component to this course. The class is scheduled to allow for the integration of discussions, in-class and field activities, and early field mornings.

This course is open to anyone interested in wildlife ecology, particularly the field and applied aspects. It is particularly suitable for students interested in pursuing careers in field ecology, or those interested in working with state or federal agencies, or NGOs. Assessment will be based on participation, activities, reflections, and an end-of-term technical report and presentation.

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: Biology (form and function and/or Cellular Processes), Ecology, and GIS I: Foundations and Applications or permission of the instructor. Class limit: 16. Lab fee: $50.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES."
"In his seminal essay on the ""Land Ethic,"" Aldo Leopold explores the incongruity between man's legal structures and the natural world around him.  This incongruity is particularly acute in the area of wildlife conservation.  Students will develop the ability to analyze and understand complex legal problems involving wildlife.  In addition, this course examines the legal, philosophical, scientific, economic, and political problems surrounding man's relationship with other species on this planet.   The far-reaching goals and impacts of the Endangered Species Act are a central focus of the course.  Significant time is also dedicated to legal issues concerning marine mammals, Native American's wildlife concerns, migratory birds, animal rights, and agencies entrusted to manage wildlife.  The class will also cover the growing rights of nature movement, the plight of Right Whales, and 30x30 campaigns in some depth.  Students will complete a term-long group project that applies the course content to a pressing wildlife issue.  Evaluation is based on class participation, problem sets, and contribution to the group project.

Level: Advanced.  Prerequisite: Environmental Law and Policy or permission of the instructor. Class limit: 10.  Lab fee: $20.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS"
"In higher latitudes and higher altitudes of the world, up to nine months of each year can be spent locked in winter.  Although migratory species appear to have a selective advantage over non-migratory species during the winter season, year-round resident animals have evolved a remarkable array of physiological, morphological, and behavioral adaptations that allow them to cope with potentially lethal environmental conditions.  In this course, we focus on the special challenges of animals wintering in northern latitudes.  Some of the topics that we address are:  the physical properties of snow and ice, general strategies of animals for coping with sub-freezing temperatures, life in the subnivean environment, animal energetics and nutrition, physiological acclimatization, and humans and cold.  There are two discussions/lectures and one field exercise every week, as well as two weekend field trips.  Students should be prepared to spend a significant amount of time outdoors in winter conditions.  Students are evaluated on class participation, exams, and a student term project.  

Level: Intermediate/Advanced.  Prerequisites:  Permission of instructor.  Class limit:  10.  Lab fee $165.  Meets the following degree requirements: ES"
"This course will explore the process of narrative storytelling with sound. We will study a broad range of audio formats, from podcasts to audio installations to interactive soundwalks. Students learn each step of creating an audio story, from recording techniques and initial collection in the field or in archival collections through the writing to the final production of a podcast or audio piece. Students will learn the technical skills of digitizing audio and conducting interviews, scripting and writing stories based on that audio, editing audio and creating sound-rich audio productions in digital editing software.
	
This class will focus primarily on digital material already collected in the field or found in local collections. These stories are from downeast communities in Hancock and Washington Counties and will build on ongoing collaborative work. Students will work in small groups and individually on each stage of production based on their interests as well as on ongoing projects. Opportunities exist to explore various forms of audio storytelling in a final project. This course is  for students with interests in documentary work, storytelling, oral history, and community-based research broadly construed. Students will be evaluated on individual audio assignments (transcription, scripting, digitizing, and production work) as well as their contribution to group projects

Level: Intermediate:  Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"Experiential learning is the fundamental process of learning by doing. Educators and theorists have championed hands-on experiences to better understand techniques, to improve adaptive/creative learning, and to foster passion and a deeper understanding of material. This course will focus on the built environment and learning through a hands-on practicum with three of the most fundamental building materials used in the world: wood, stone and steel.
Borrowing from the “farm-to-fork” concept familiar in food systems studies – this class will be based on a “field, fabrication, and function” format. Students will harvest, process, and build with locally sourced materials. This class is structured so teams of students design and fabricate outdoor benches made from live edge slabs placed on local granite or cedar legs. Along the way they will explore concepts of experiential learning, biophilia, eco/structural design, community engagement, collaborative learning, sustainable building practices, tool use, and safe building techniques.

Students will learn through readings, research, and, of course, hands-on work. Students will be assessed on a combination of short research projects, group discussions, class participation, reflective journaling, and final product assessment. The default grading for this course is pass/fail. 

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: $40.  Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"For much of the past 5000 years the sea has played a major role in a broad variety of human cultures, histories, arts, and economies.  Sea-faring peoples have developed a rich lore and technology that allows them to both survive and even thrive in an often hostile element. This course will mix practical, hands-on learning of aspects of seamanship with a survey of fiction and non-fiction that address maritime themes.  During the early part of the term we will concentrate on aspects of small-boat handling, using the College’s inflatables, rowing boats, and the larger research vessels, Osprey and Laughing Gull.  Students will learn how to launch and land small-craft from docks and beaches, basic rowing skills and use of an outboard motor. They will learn essential knots useful aboard ship and on the dock, how to lay out a course using a chart and compass, use of GPS and depth sounders, basic Rules of the Road, and elements of celestial navigation.  During some lab periods we will go on short voyages in the general area of Frenchman Bay. As the term proceeds and weather worsens, we will turn to an increasingly greater literary component, reading accounts of famous voyages and local fishermen, discoveries, battles, legends and poetry.  Possible texts include, but are not limited to: Working the Sea by Wendell Seavey, Master and Commander by Patrick O’ Brian, Maiden Voyage by Tania Aebi, The Perfect Storm by Sebastian Junger, In the Heart of The Sea by Nathaniel Philbrick, Longitude by Dava Sobel, Slave Ship: A Human History by Marcus Rediker, Kon Tiki by Thor Heyerdahl, We Didn’t Mean to Go To Sea by Arthur Ransome as well as excerpts from The Greenlanders’ Saga, Moby Dick, The Old Man and the Sea, The Voyage of the Beagle, and Two Years Before the Mast. Students will be evaluated on the basis of class participation, a number of short “quizzes” – which will include practical elements - and a term paper focusing on one aspect of working the sea. 

Level: Introductory.  Prerequisites: Permission of Instructor.  Class limit: 10.  Lab Fee $100. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"This course presents twentieth- and twenty-first-century world literature from every continent in the context of its relation to cultural, political, and personal identity. We also explore, simply, What makes a great story?
One of the main objectives is to provide tools necessary for an informed analysis of texts, especially in light of questions of identity formation, languages, and an imagined or remembered sense of home or displacement, amid personal and cultural conflict in today's world. Viewing and discussing contemporary films that resonate thematically with the readings is an integral part of the course.

Along with becoming familiar with elements such as genre, narrative, style, and theme, we explore what the writings reflect about the authors and their worlds. Short fiction and memoir will include works by writers such as Valeria Luiselli, Sjón,  Tsitsi Dangaremba, Meryem Alaoui, Pajtim Statovci, Chigozie Obiama, Hiroko Oyamada, Yaa Gyasi, Xialo Guo, Tommy Orange, Han King, László Krasznahorkai, Kamel Daoud, Banana Yoshimoto, Roque Larraquy, Emile Habibi, Reza Baraheni, Nawal el Saadawi, Lu Xun, Jaime Manrique, Ren?é Alomá, Carme Riera, Alifa Rifaat, Olga Tokarczuk, Ab?é Kobo, Jack Agüeros, Empar Moliner, Ben-Zion Tomer, Arundhati Roy, Shulamith Hareven, Haruki Murakami, Roya Hakakian, Edwidge Danticat, Pola Oloixarac, Abelardo ""Lalo"" Delgado, Ingeborg Bachmann, Tadeusz Borowski, Mahasweta  Devi, Naguib Mahfouz, Gabriel García Márquez, and Tove Jansson.  Evaluations will be based on discussion, two short papers, and one interpretive essay.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisite: None. Class limit: 15. Lab Fee: None. Fulfills the following degree requirement: HS."
"Students will learn the fundamentals and rhythms of West Africa, Cuba, and Brazil. In addition to having a better understanding of the world of percussion, students will master rhythmic notation, counting and subdivision, time signature, and reading percussion music.  Students will work online in groups to compose a percussion ensemble composition and will do a research project on a percussion topic of their choice, approved by the instructor. Students will take a basic knowledge test of rhythms and instruments. Evaluation will be based on ensemble composition (33%), research project (33%), and final test (33%).
 
Level:  Introductory.  Prerequisites: None, but students need to have a drum, preferably a djembe. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: ADS"
"2024 is the fiftieth anniversary of the Declaration on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order (NIEO) by members of the General Assembly of the United Nations (UNGA). This course examines both the roots of efforts through the 1960s and 1970s by newly decolonized states to change the economic architecture of the global system, and current initiatives for reform to the global economy, including through calls for a NIEO II. The text for the first half of the course is Adom Getachew’s Worldmaking after Empire: the rise and fall of self-determination. This part of the course explores the efforts by leaders of anti-colonial struggles in the Caribbean and Africa to shape a new post-imperial world, both politically and economically, building to the effort in the UNGA for the NIEO declaration. The second half of the course will focus on the international trade and financial institutions (World Trade Organization, World Bank, International Monetary Fund, multilateral development banks), their role in ongoing sovereign debt crises, and current efforts underway to reform the international financial architecture shaped by these institutions. The course will be conducted as an advanced seminar, with significant student responsibility for leading our conversations. Evaluation will be based on contributions to the collective learning throughout the term, regular short essays on course material, and one or more presentations made to the class on historical figures or topics of interest to them. As this is an advanced seminar, students taking the class should have had one or more previous courses in areas related to politics or economics.

Level: Advanced. Prerequisites: One or more courses in politics and/or economics.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: HS."
"This course will explore the emergent discourses concerned with multispecies justice and the recognition of more-than-human communities. Students will engage with different approaches to these modes of environmental thinking, research, and writing in order to consider worlds beyond the human. This approach examines how the distinctions between nature/culture and human/nonhuman came into being and considers what kind of life is constituted, held accountable, and conserved. Amidst the rapid, yet often obscured, ecological changes happening around the globe, how are cultural, legal, and environmental justice narratives emerging which de-center the human and acknowledge the ‘rights of nature’? Importantly, what are the potential limits to a multispecies or rights framework in a world where entire mountaintops are removed to continue legacies of extractive capitalism? Students will engage with literature and thinkers across a spectrum of approaches to more-than-human ethics including: new materialism, posthumanism, the growing global movement towards granting legal personhood for non-humans, and the cultures advocating for reciprocal rights and responsibilities to more-than-human communities. Course content will extend analysis beyond a multispecies and/or rights framework towards considering the agencies, sovereignties, and analytics of other-than-humans such as water, geologic formations, and even fungi. Overarchingly, the course will prompt students to articulate and write on the potentials of more-than-human ethics to assist equity outcomes for ecological and social communities during the Anthropocene. Assignments will include regular participation in class discussion, responses to colleagues’ written posts, a series of short reflective essays, and a final project based on each student’s own research interests, as it pertains to course content. Particular emphasis throughout the course will encourage students to demonstrate critical reading, speaking, and writing through synthesis of course content and class discussions.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class Limit: 15. Lab Fee: None."
"We write to discover what awes us, what questions we most need to ask, what conversations we hope to join, what causes we are drawn to support, what convictions we want to voice, and what ways we can write the world anew. Writing is both an art and a social action that can change us and our audiences. That is the province of this course.

We will read and analyze various forms of writing (genres) on a broad range of social and policy issues, such as the value of wonder, the importance of antiracist work, the need for accessibility policies on college campuses, and other issues. We will consider the craft, context, audience, purpose, and possibilities of these texts as guides for our own writing. We will focus on the possibilities of the written and spoken word; the power of our distinct and unique voices; the importance of taking risks in our thinking and writing; the messiness, urgency, and necessity of the writing process; and the value of intellectual inquiry and the seamless integration and documentation of researched material. 

Students will address current issues of pressing concern and personal relevance in their own writing in three different selected genres (e.g., reflective essay, commentary, letter to editor, Commencement speech, testimony, proposal, open letter, personal statement, etc.). Students will examine and develop strategies for writing with curiosity, clarity, complexity, creativity, courage, and compassion as they invite their audience to consider their ideas and invitations/calls to action. Students will write about issues that matter to them, ones of interest to a local (Mount Desert Island or home town), state (Maine or home state), and/or national audience.

Classwork will include various analytical, generative, and collaborative exercises designed to help with matters of language, craft, technique, and rhetorical awareness. Students will write for a public audience and participate in active engagement with each other’s work.

Authors (representing a range of genres and topics) will likely include Annie Dillard, Rachel Carson, Barry Lopez, David Whyte, Margaret Renkl, Toni Morrison, Martin Luther King Jr., Terry Tempest Williams, and others. Students will also select a longer text to read from a list of authors that may include Jonathan Safran Foer, Susan Cain, Felicia Rose Chavez, Claudia Rankine, and others.

Students will be evaluated on class participation, written assignments, writing process, and presentations. 

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: W."
"In this course we’ll explore many of the ways that writing makes the work of nonprofit organizations possible. We’ll learn to identify, analyze, and recreate several genres that are essential for nonprofits (as well as similar, mission-driven companies). Together as a class we’ll collaborate with local nonprofits and you’ll create, for instance, a grant proposal, program report or other kinds of writing to support the organization you will work with. Throughout the term, you’ll become familiar with varied communication needs, audiences, and rhetorical contexts unique to nonprofits. This experience will help you develop rhetorical awareness and flexibility as a writer in any new setting.
 
We will practice conceptualizing and composing clear, concise, and compelling materials that meet the multimodal communication needs typical of mission-driven organizations. Through analyzing the written materials produced by nonprofits of different sizes (smaller, grassroots organizations and larger national and international organizations) and areas of focus (environment, education and literacy, biomedical research) we’ll work as a class to understand the purposes and conventions of several key genres: mission statements, grant proposals and reports, and digital marketing and communications.
 
Evaluation is based on class participation and successfully completing shorter writing assignments and a longer document.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None.  Class Limit: 12.  Lab fee: none.  Meets the following degree requirements: W."
"Designed to meet the first-year writing requirement, this course gives students the opportunity to explore rhetorical strategies of writing for social change. Beginning with writing that emerged in the wake of George Floyd's death, we will read and analyze articles and essays that deal with a range of contemporary social issues.

By examining the principles of exposition and argumentation, students will develop their analytical skills. Students should expect to spend a significant amount of time on sentence-level construction. Grammar and syntax are powerful tools that can be used to craft persuasive, moving arguments. Grammar and syntax can also be used to mislead and manipulate an audience. Understanding grammar and syntax is essential for reading and writing well. But whose grammar and syntax are we talking about when we say ""writing well""? Standard American English or Edited American English is the written language taught in most American schools and used in much of the media that we consume. But it is not the only English available to us. By de-penalizing and making space for ""nondominant Englishes"" (Asao B. Inoue), we will explore how ""language functions within and from various cultural perspectives"" (Vershawn Ashanti Young). By practicing the art of code-meshing, students will explore ""the connection between language and identity"" (Neisha-Anne S. Green) and develop ""critical awareness of choices that are rhetorically more effective"" (Suresh Canagajah).

Classes will focus on both writing activities that teach students to explore and strengthen their prose, and discussion and analysis of the works we read. Two short academic papers will help students develop a writing process that works for them. Additionally, students will engage in activist writing throughout the term, allowing them to put the writing strategies they have learned into action. The culmination of the term will be a research project on a social issue of their choosing that will test their ability to put rhetorical strategies to effective use.

Evaluation is based on engagement in class discussions and successful completion of all writing assignments (weekly activist writing, two analytical papers, and a final writing project).  

Level: Introductory/Intermediate.  Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 12.  Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: W"
"How does the environment affect our sense of place as well as national, regional, and personal identity? Taking a multifaceted view of human relationships with nature, students will generate research projects driven by questions about tourism and eco-tourism, species population change, climate degradation, the role of technology, and development of wildlands and waterways. Research discussed in class will also center on environmental values and challenges expressed by ecocritics, naturalists, biologists, philosophers, archaeologists, psychologists, poets, filmmakers, and others from the nineteenth century to the present. Several local excursions will provide opportunities for taking field notes. Students will be encouraged to experiment with different forms of writing, expanding their genre analysis, rhetorical awareness, and research practices, while deepening their own relationship with nature. Sharing work during peer reviews will become integral, uncovering and inspiring various writing processes.

This transdisciplinary, experiential approach will help establish a strong foundation for students’ writings outside this course and for evaluating possible impacts on the environment by potential encroachments. Spanning memoir, travel, science and nature, cultural issues, and current events, short readings will include writers such as Wendell Berry, Charles Darwin, Susan Fenimore Cooper, Luther Standing Bear, Jacquetta Hawkes, Richard Wright, Edward Abbey, N. Scott Momaday, Leslie Marmon Silko, Loren Eiseley, Terry Tempest Williams, Jamaica Kincaid, Ray Gonzalez, Evelyn C. White, and Jessica Hernandez.
Evaluations will be based on fieldnotes, two research projects, and class discussions.

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: None. Class Limit: 12. Lab Fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: W, HS."
"Designed to serve the overall academic program, this course focuses on formal writing based on rhetorical principles of exposition and concentrates on the writing process: prewriting, writing, and rewriting.  Assigned readings both illustrate how to use these principles and develop students' analytical skills.  Through a research paper or case study, this course introduces students to library research and documentation of an academic paper.  Each section emphasizes peer review, revision, regular conferences, and some class presentations.  

Level:  Introductory.  Class limit: 12.  Meets the following degree requirements: W"
"A logical sequence to Writing Seminar I, this course emphasizes argument and persuasion.  The assigned readings show students not only how others passionately and creatively argue points but how argument and persuasion are integral to writing effective papers on topics ranging from the need to diversify the student body to protecting Atlantic salmon.  Like Writing Seminar I, this course also requires library research and an understanding of different forms of documentation. 

Level: Introductory/Intermediate.  Prerequisites:  None.  Class limit: 12. Lab fee: None.  Meets the following degree requirements: W"
"Although the novella remains one of the most underappreciated and misunderstood literary genres, its structural brevity offers students the ideal form to study how to create long-form fiction. Class time will be primarily devoted to discussing the novellas we have read. Texts may include ""Seize the Day"" by Saul Bellow, ""The Grownup"" by Gillian Flynn, ""Neighbors"" by Lilia Momple, ""Pedro Paramo"" by Juan Rulfo, and ""Indian Nocturne"" by Antonio Tabucchi. During class, we will look at strategies of dialogue, point-of-view, plot, and setting. Students will learn how other writers develop characters with precision, fluidly integrate backstory and flashbacks into narratives, and make use of the three narrative modes: full scene, half scene, and summary narration.

To help establish a routine of writing, students will sign up for daily work periods in the writing center. Some work periods will start with a prompt to help students focus their imaginations on specific aspects of their stories, but most work periods will primarily be dedicated to individual writing. By maintaining a habit of writing and reflecting throughout the course on their progress, students will develop a process of writing that works for them. By the end of the course, each student will be expected to hand in a polished first draft ranging between 20,000 to 50,000 words. Shorter novellas will go through more extensive revision than longer novellas. Students will be evaluated on their participation in class and their ability to execute narrative strategies in their novellas.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced.  Prerequisites: Permission of instructor; students will be asked to share a sample of their writing.  Class limit: 12. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
"The ability to make careful observations and record them through sketches is an invaluable tool for artists, scientists, and other curious and creative people. Maintaining a sketchbook can be both a professionally useful and personally rewarding practice. This multidisciplinary course will encourage students to develop a regular sketchbook practice using animals as the focus of study. It is intended for any student who wishes to improve their sketching and observational skills, gain an understanding of animal anatomy, and learn about local animal life. Students will draw from museum specimens, taxidermy mounts, and live animals using a variety of media and techniques suitable for field sketching. Class will take place in the Dorr Museum and at field sites within Acadia National Park and Hancock County.

This course will meet for two three hour sessions per week. The first session will include a lesson about a particular animal taxon, followed by sketching exercises using museum specimens and mounts as references. In the second session, students will draw from live animals in the field. Students will also spend approximately nine hours per week outside of class on additional field sketching assignments, readings, and research.

Evaluations will emphasize participation and student growth rather than artistic ability. Our focus will be on practice and learning to effectively record observations, not on creating polished illustrations. Prior experience with drawing is not required.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None.  Class limit: 15.  Lab fee: $70. Meets the following degree requirements: None."
