1

2022-23 Academic Catalog
Carleton’s Academic Catalog is produced by the Office of the Registrar.
The provisions of this catalog are subject to change without notice and do not constitute an
irrevocable contract between any students and Carleton College.
As required by state and federal law, Carleton College does not discriminate on the basis of race
color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, marital status, sexual orientation, status with regard to
public assistance, age, or disability in providing employment or in its educational programs and
activities.

Historically Speaking
Carleton College was founded by the Minnesota Conference of Congregational Churches under the
name of Northfield College on November 14, 1866. Preparatory school classes began in September
1867, but it was not until 1870, when the Reverend James W. Strong took office as the first
president, that the first college class was formed and construction on the first on-campus building
was begun. It was agreed at the outset that after one year formal church control should end, but
throughout its formative years the College received significant support and direction from the
Congregational churches. Although it is now autonomous and non-sectarian, the College respects
these historical ties and gives continuing recognition to them through membership in the Council
for Higher Education of the United Church of Christ.
By the fall of 1871, the name of the College had been changed to honor an early benefactor,
William Carleton of Charlestown, Massachusetts, who earlier that year had bestowed a gift of
$50,000 on the struggling young college. At the time, it was the largest single contribution ever
made to a western college, and it was made unconditionally, with no design that the name of the
College should be changed.
Carleton has always been a coeducational institution. The original graduating class in 1874 was
composed of one man and one woman who followed similar academic programs. Carleton’s current
enrollment is 2008 (Fall 2021).
Mission, Vision, Values and Goals
The mission of Carleton College is to provide an exceptional undergraduate liberal arts education.
In pursuit of this mission, the College is devoted to academic excellence, distinguished by the
creative interplay of teaching, learning, and scholarship, and dedicated to our diverse residential
community and extensive international engagements.
The College’s aspiration is to prepare students to lead lives of learning that are broadly rewarding,
professionally satisfying, and of service to humanity. By discovering and sharing exemplary models
of undergraduate education, the College seeks to be a leader among those colleges, universities, and
professional organizations that share our dedication to this vision.

2

Carleton strives to be a collaborative community that encourages curiosity and intellectual
adventure of the highest quality. Faculty, staff, and students respect one another for the serious
work and the playful humor we share, and we support each other in pursuing a healthy balance of
mind, body, and spirit. Quiet reflection and lively engagement are valued as sources of selfunderstanding and renewal. Carleton honors thoughtful conversations about difficult questions as
necessary for individual growth and community strength. The College works to embody the values
of freedom of inquiry and expression, and is vigilant in protecting these values within a culture of
academic integrity, civil deliberation, and ethical action. Carleton aims to be welcoming and
hospitable to its neighbors, guests, and the public, and a responsible steward of its resources.
Carleton’s academic goals focus on developing the critical and creative talents of our students
through broad and rigorous studies in the liberal arts disciplines. Mentored by dedicated faculty and
staff, students become active members of a learning and living community that promotes the
exploration of passionate interests and emerging avocations. Students learn higher order thinking
skills: disciplinary inquiry, analysis of evidence, arts of communication and argumentation, and
problem-solving strategies. In their chosen fields of study, students strengthen their capabilities for
disciplinary and interdisciplinary research and artistic production. Students acquire the knowledge
necessary for the continuing study of the world’s peoples, arts, environments, literatures, sciences,
and institutions.
Carleton develops qualities of mind and character that prepare its graduates to become citizens and
leaders, capable of finding inventive solutions to local, national, and global challenges.
Accreditation and Affiliations
Accredited by several associations, including the Higher Learning Commission (since 1913),
Carleton offers the Bachelor of Arts degree. Among the academic honor societies with chapters on
the campus are Phi Beta Kappa and Mortar Board, scholastic honor societies and Sigma Xi, science
honor society.
Carleton is a member of the Associated Colleges of the Midwest (ACM).
Carleton College is accredited by the Higher Learning Commission, 230 South LaSalle Street, Suite
7-500, Chicago, Illinois 60604-1411. Phone 800-621-7440.
Carleton College is registered with the Minnesota Office of Higher Education pursuant to
Minnesota Statutes sections 136A.61 to 136A.71. Registration is not an endorsement of the
institution. Credits earned at the institution may not transfer to all other institutions.
College Governance
The Carleton Board of Trustees is responsible for the general educational and financial policies and
operations of the College. Many of the policies and procedures that guide the day-to-day operation
of the College originate in and are implemented by the shared governance system of college
committees and the President’s senior leadership team. Carleton’s shared governance is historically
separated into two categories: educational policy, as determined by the faculty, and non-educational
policy, as carried forward by the College Council.

3

The faculty receive policy recommendations from the Education and Curriculum Committee (ECC).
The ECC, co-led by a faculty member and the Dean of the College, is comprised of faculty and
students, who will function as a hearing and policy formulation committee. They are responsible for
the articulation of educational policy and will receive occasional reports from other committees
(such as the Academic Standing Committee) that are primarily concerned with educational or
curricular matters.
The College Council oversees non-educational policy which may be forwarded on to the Board of
Trustees for approval. The Council, chaired by the President, is made up of faculty, staff and
students, including the faculty president and the president of the Carleton Student Association. The
Board of Trustees and the Alumni Council each designate a non-voting representative to attend
meetings. The Council may create subcommittees, consisting of members of the Council and other
campus constituents, to consult and produce policy recommendations when needed. There are
currently three subcommittees of the College Council: the Budget Committee, the Campus Design
Advisory Committee, and the Community, Equity, Diversity and Inclusion (CEDI) Leadership
Board.
The Advisory Committee on Student Life is constituted as an advisory committee to the Vice
President for Student Life and Dean of Students to address challenges and opportunities specifically
concerning student life, and to help develop policies and practices for review by College Council or
the Board of Trustees.
Carleton Student Association
Every student is a member of the Carleton Student Association (CSA). Three officers and 22
senators are elected annually to serve as the Senate, CSA’s legislative body. The Senate’s duties
include: the election of student members; creation of ad-hoc subcommittees; the management of the
CSA activities fees, chartering new student organizations, and the appointment of student
representatives to various campus committees. CSA also works with the Dean of Students Office to
address issues of concern to students.
The College: A Statistical Look
Carleton College is a co-educational, residential liberal arts college with a distinguished faculty and
a diverse student body of about 2,000.
In fall of 2021, 35% of Carleton’s 2008 students came from the Midwest, 24% from the West, 18%
from the East, 11% from the South, and 11% from outside the United States. Approximately 33%
are African American, Asian, Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander, Hispanic, Native American or of
two or more races. 59% of Carleton students receive institutional need-based aid.
Carleton had 236 full-time faculty in fall 2021, and 100% of all tenured and tenure-track faculty
have a doctorate or a terminal degree in their field. The overall student/faculty ratio is 8:1. The
average class size is 15. In the fall of 2021, 73% percent of class sections had under 20 students,
and no class had over 50 students. Each year, students can choose from approximately 1000 courses
in 33 majors and several interdisciplinary programs. During their four-year college career, 70% of
students participate in off-campus study programs.

4

In the fall of 2021, 94% of the cohort of 2020 first-year students returned to Carleton. In accordance
with the Higher Education Act of 1965, as amended, the six-year graduation rate for the cohort that
entered in fall of 2015 was 91%, and 87% of that cohort graduated in four years or fewer.
Since 2016, 15% of graduates enrolled in graduate or professional study within one year of
graduation. Of the graduates from 2006-2010, 75% had done so within ten years. The six most
common fields of graduate study for Carleton graduates since 2001 have been: Health or Medical,
Education, Law, Business Administration, Earth Sciences, and Psychology.
Carleton ranks first among 243 baccalaureate-level arts and sciences colleges in graduates who have
earned doctoral degrees in academic fields between 2007 and 2019 (the most recent year for which
data are available). In that period, according to the National Science Foundation Survey of Earned
Doctorates, Carleton graduates earned 1,133 academic doctorates, including 279 in the life sciences
(#1), 251 in physical and earth sciences (#1), 74 in mathematics and computer science (#3), and 197
in humanities and arts (#6).
From 2000 to 2022, Carleton graduates have won 153 National Science Foundation Graduate
Fellowships, 152 Fulbright Fellowships, 26 Watson Fellowships, 18 Goldwater Scholarships, and 1
Rhodes Scholarship. At seven to ten years after graduation, the most common job areas in the work
history of Carleton alums are Scientist, Researcher, or Analyst (40%), Computing and Software
(19%), Teaching Pre-K through High School (16%), Communications and Media (12%), working at
colleges and universities in administrative or staff positions (11%), and Creative / Performing Arts
and Museums (10%).
Questions related to this report should be directed to Carleton’s Office of Institutional Research and
Assessment at (507) 222-4292.
The Campus
What now constitutes 1040 acres of campus, arboretum, and athletic fields started with two ten-acre
tracts deeded to the infant college in 1867 by Charles M. Goodsell, a miller, and Charles A.
Wheaton, Northfield editor.
Even before a class was held, the trustees authorized the executive committee “to enclose the
grounds and improve the same by cultivation and planting trees.” This concern for the students’
environment is still an important aspect of the Carleton experience. As of today, Willis Hall has
been joined by 44 others on campus, including 12 academic facilities, 11 on-campus residence halls,
nine student apartment houses, four recreation and athletic facilities, a library, a chapel, an
observatory and a campus center. The College also offers 31 college-owned student houses,
including 14 cultural or language shared interest houses.
Architectural Heritage
The history of Willis Hall, the oldest building on campus, is typical of many of Carleton’s older
facilities. While remaining true to their architectural heritage, they have served a variety of needs
over the years, evolving—with the aid of judicious renovations—to meet the needs of an everchanging institution.

5

Willis, for example, started out as an all-purpose building: it contained a men’s dormitory,
classrooms, offices, and a small chapel. Later, a bookstore and a post office were added. Still later,
the building was transformed into a student union. In 1976, it was remodeled again, reverting to an
academic building.
The following chronological listing of Carleton’s buildings indicates their present function. For
information on the history of each, consult Carleton: The First Century by Leal Headley and
Merrill Jarchow.
Willis Hall, 1872

Economics and educational studies offices, classrooms, and seminar room
Goodsell Observatory, 1887

Archaeology laboratory, astronomy, 16-inch visual refractor telescope, 8-inch photographic
refractor telescope, astronomy laboratory, and other faculty offices
Scoville Hall, 1896

Admissions and Student Financial Services offices. Renovated in 2017.
Laird Hall, 1906

English offices, classrooms, President and Deans' Offices, Registrar's Office, and administrative
offices. Renovated in 2021.
Sayles‐Hill Campus Center, 1910

Student social, organizational, and activity spaces; student post office; café; bookstore;
administrative offices; classrooms. Renovated in 1979, addition completed in 1988.
The Music Hall, 1914, now Hasenstab Hall

Political science offices, classrooms, and flexible space for classes, research, and collaboration.
Music Hall built in 1914, renovated in 2022.

Skinner Memorial Chapel, 1916

Chapel and offices
Burton Hall, 1916

Residence hall and dining hall

6
Nourse Hall, 1917

Residence hall, and Nourse Theater
Leighton Hall, 1921

Religion, history, philosophy, sociology and anthropology offices, classrooms, administrative
offices
Davis Hall, 1923

Residence hall and Wellness Center
Evans Hall, 1927

Residence hall, renovated in 2013
Severance Hall, 1927

Residence hall, Dean of Students Office, Residential Life Office
Laird Stadium, 1927

Locker rooms; weight training area; football game field; eight-lane, 400-meter, all-weather track
Boliou Memorial Art Hall, 1949

Gallery, studios, classrooms, and art and art history department offices, expansion and remodeling
completed in 1995.
Laurence McKinley Gould Library, 1956

510,370 volumes, 262,879 government documents, 380 print journals currently received, access to
over 186,080 electronic journals, over 1,281,388 electronic books, 414 electronic databases, 450
study spaces, 52 public access computers, computer lab, 18 group study rooms, classrooms, and
staff offices. The Writing Center and Academic Support is located in the library as well as the
Quantitative Resource Center.
Musser Hall, 1958

Residence hall
Myers Hall, 1958

Residence hall

7
Olin Hall of Science, 1961

Cognitive Science, computer science, physics, psychology offices, classrooms, auditorium, and
laboratories, renovations completed in 1997, and in 2020.
Goodhue Hall, 1962

Residence hall
The West Gymnasium, 1964

Basketball courts, swimming pool, locker rooms and offices of Physical Education, Athletics and
Recreation department
Cowling Gymnasium, 1965

Gymnasium, pool, dance studio and offices
Watson Hall, 1967

Residence hall
Johnson House and Alumni Guest House, 1992

Linked structures, Johnson House contains offices and support space for Career Center, and the
Alumni Guest House has guest quarters, a library/lounge, and meeting room.
Center for Mathematics and Computing, 1993

Mathematics and statistics department offices, the Math Skills Center and library, Institutional
Technology Services, including three computing laboratories, training room, administrative offices
and classrooms.
Hulings Hall, 1995

Biology department offices and portions of the psychology department, teaching and research
laboratories, and greenhouse. Renovated 2020.
Recreation Center, 2000

Climbing wall, aerobic/dance studio, fitness center, racquetball courts, and field house with 200
meter indoor track, surrounding four infield courts for volleyball, tennis and basketball.
Language and Dining Center, 2001

Asian languages, classical languages, German, Russian, French, Spanish and Middle Eastern
Languages, The Language Center, classrooms, seminar rooms, 400-seat dining hall.

8
Student apartment houses, 2001

Nine two- and three-story houses (Brooks, Collier, Colwell, Dixon, Eugster, Hunt, Nason, Owens,
and Scott) offer 23 apartments accommodating 100 students.
Cassat and James Hall, 2009

Two four-story residence halls located on the southeast side of campus and linked by an
underground tunnel. They house 230 students from all class years, with more than half living in
traditional singles and doubles in Cassat Hall and nearly 100 living in suites in James Hall. Both
halls have been designed with an eye toward sustainability and include numerous shared spaces to
encourage community life and innovative features.
Weitz Center for Creativity, 2011

Facility geared toward creative collaboration supporting multiple student and classroom projects
and allowing faculty members to teach with words, images, sounds, and narrative in a variety of
media. In addition to housing the departments of Cinema and Media Studies (CAMS), Theater, and
Dance, the space includes a teaching museum, a dramatic theater, a cinema theater, dance studios,
classrooms, the Learning and Teaching Center and a coffee shop. The building is home to the
Presentation, Events and Production Support (PEPS) office and the IdeaLab, a shared,
interdisciplinary laboratory for exploring and learning to use technology. Music addition, in 2017,
added a 400-seat performance hall, two rehearsal rooms, 13 practice rooms, and music faculty
offices.
Anderson Hall, 2019

The integrated science complex is home to the Chemistry, Geology, and Physics departments.
Features include state-of-the-art labs, classrooms, and the Class of 1969 Makerspace, a
collaborative space stocked with tools to design, prototype, and build. The Daugherty Atrium, a
three-story glass foyer, functions as a "living room" for the science departments, including Olin and
Hulings Halls. The East Energy Station is housed under the basement.
Sustainability
Carleton College recognizes that it exists as part of interconnected communities that are affected by
personal and institutional choices. We are dedicated, therefore, to investigating and promoting
awareness of the current and future impact of our actions in order to foster responsibility for these
human and natural communities. Carleton strives to be a model of environmental stewardship by
incorporating ideals of sustainability into the operations of the College and the daily life of
individuals.
Carleton has a Climate Action Plan with the goal of becoming a carbon neutral campus by 2050.
To support the Climate Action Plan, sustainability and climate change topics have been integrated
into the curriculum along with many student work-study positions that are engaged in projects to
advance on-campus sustainability initiatives in the areas of waste, land management, energy supply
and demand, procurement, and transportation.

9

Carleton transitioned to a campus-wide geothermal heating and cooling system that will reduce
operating costs and carbon-emissions enabling the campus to use more sources of renewable
energy. The five-year geothermal project was completed in 2021.
In 2004 the college constructed a 1.65 megawatt wind turbine. It was the first college-owned,
utility scale wind turbine in the United States and over the life of the turbine it is expected to
produce about 100-120 million kilowatt hours of clean energy. A second 1.6 megawatt wind
turbine began providing power directly to Carleton’s electrical grid in fall 2011.
The College has a comprehensive recycling and compost program along with various carsharing and public transportation opportunities around Northfield and to the Twin Cities.
New Construction LEED Projects

In keeping with Carleton values, two new residence halls, Cassat and James Halls and Weitz
Center for Creativity received LEED gold certification through the U.S. Green Building Council’s
Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) program. The Integrated Science
Complex was built to platinum certification level.
Cassat Hall and James Hall, with exteriors of durable brick, stone, and clay tile, are of an
environmentally sustainable design, and earned a LEED gold certification based on the U.S. Green
Building Council’s standards in sustainable design, construction, and operation. Solar thermal roof
panels (made in Minnesota) on Cassat Hall are designed to heat 50% of the domestic water by
utilizing energy from the sun to pre-heat supply water. Photovoltaic (PV) solar roof panels on James
Hall convert energy from the sun into electricity to power the buildings.
Carleton chose not to demolish the historic old middle school when planning for the Weitz Center
for Creativity, rather, entire sections of the original 1910 and 1934 structures were either preserved
or recycled. The following materials have been reclaimed for use in the new facility: mosaic tile
floor, ornate ironwork on a main staircase, wood from the bleachers in the former gym which was
reused as wall covering, wood seats from the 1930s-era auditorium which appear as a sculpture
installation on the ceiling leading to the new cinema, much of the original woodwork and trim, and
slate from the original blackboards. Many details helped the Weitz Center for Creativity achieve
LEED gold certification.
Carleton's new integrated science complex includes renovation of Hulings and Olin Hall, and
construction of Evelyn M. Anderson Hall in the courtyard connecting the buildings into one
facility. The project is tracking to platinum level and has implemented many sustainable practices to
optimize energy performance, water efficiency, enhanced mechanical/electrical systems, indoor air
quality management, reduced light pollution, and recycling more than 75% construction waste.

Academic Programs
Well over a century ago, Carleton started promising its students a “liberal and thorough” education.
That goal is embodied still in the College’s requirements for graduation, which are designed to
expose students to a wide variety of disciplines, as well as to allow them to concentrate on a major
subject.

10

Graduation Requirements
To receive a Bachelor of Arts degree from Carleton, a student must earn at least 210 credits and a
cumulative grade point average of C (2.0) or better.
Liberal Arts Requirements: (AI, Curricular Exploration, Global Citizenship, Writing, QRE and PE)

A good liberal arts education requires not only rigor and depth, but also sufficient breadth to expose
students to a wide range of subjects and methods of studying them. The college seeks to ensure that
its students study one field in depth by requiring a major and an integrative exercise within the
major. It encourages students to acquaint themselves with the major divisions of knowledge and
modes of inquiry by requiring them to complete six credits with grades of S or C- or better from
each of six curricular exploration areas.
Students must also complete an Argument and Inquiry seminar and fulfill requirements in writing,
quantitative reasoning, global citizenship (international studies, intercultural domestic studies, and
demonstrate proficiency in a second language), and complete four terms of physical education.
Successful completion of all course and credit requirements requires grades of S or C- or better in
each course.
Finally, students must spend six academic terms in residence at Carleton, including their senior year
(last three academic terms), and earn at least 108 credits enrolled at Carleton.
Argument and Inquiry Seminars (AI) – 6 credits

All first-year non-transfer students must take an Argument and Inquiry (AI) seminar in their first
term. Each fall term, the College offers over thirty AI seminars designed to introduce students to a
liberal arts approach to learning and to develop the critical and creative skills they will need to
thrive in academic work at Carleton. Offered in many different subject areas across the curriculum,
AI courses share certain structural elements and a set of common goals. AI courses are small,
discussion-based seminars, and carry the WR (writing rich) designation. Designed to foster
students’ intellectual independence, these courses develop habits of critical thinking, clarify how
scholars ask questions, and teach students how to find and evaluate information in reading and
research and to use it effectively and ethically in constructing arguments. Encouraging students to
become collaborative learners and active members of Carleton’s learning and living community, AI
seminars strengthen students’ habits of cooperation with peers and offer opportunities and tools for
critical reading, deliberative discussion, and effective college-level writing.
Curricular Exploration Requirements – 36 credits; 6 credits in each of 6 areas

Arts Practice (ARP) The act of imagining and creating art is an important way of understanding
and knowing art and the creative process. At least six credits are required in courses in which
students develop an appreciation of artistic creative practice through experience.
Formal or Statistical Reasoning (FSR) The development of logical systems, formal models,
abstract mathematical reasoning, and statistical reasoning has been foundational to intellectual
development in many disciplines. At least six credits are required in courses that focus on methods

11

of formal reasoning including mathematics, logic, and the design and analysis of algorithms or
statistical reasoning.
Humanistic Inquiry (HI) At least six credits are required in courses in which students are
introduced to humanistic inquiry with an emphasis in its historical, cultural, ethical, and/or
intellectual contexts.
Literary/Artistic Analysis (LA) At least six credits are required in courses in which there is an
emphasis on analysis of literature or the visual and performing arts.
Science with Lab (LS) Modern citizenship requires an understanding of the processes and methods
of the natural sciences. At least six credits are required in courses that focus on developing an
appreciation of the scientific study of the natural world. Courses must include a lab component to
qualify. In the case of a student using a six-credit course/two-credit lab pair to satisfy the LS
requirement, a grade of C- or better must be earned in each paired course.
Social Inquiry (SI) The study of human and social behavior and how these are shaped by, and
shape, socially constructed institutions is essential to a liberal education. At least six credits are
required in courses that focus on the variety of disciplinary approaches to the study of individuals
and societies.
Global Citizenship

Language Requirement: Language is the way that members of a culture organize and encode their
thoughts, allowing them to communicate with each other. Moreover, language shapes one’s
relationship with other people, and different languages will shape that relationship differently.
At Carleton we think that a liberally educated student should understand the way language is
embedded within cultural practices and worldviews. To this end, we expect students to cross
linguistic borders, experiencing another language “from the inside.” In addition to the primary
benefits a degree of competency in a language can offer (including basic communication, the ability
to read foreign texts, and interaction with those of a different culture), the study of a foreign
language provides students with a fuller understanding of the role played by their own native
tongue. Also, crucially, it requires each student to experience the challenges of dealing with other
cultures and peoples on their own terms. Language learning at Carleton, therefore, advances and
supports the stated values and goals of the College’s Mission Statement.
The four basic language skills for most modern languages (reading, speaking, aural comprehension,
and writing) are mutually reinforcing as well as individually valuable, although the emphasis will
vary among different language sections and individual teaching styles. In special cases, students’
strengths (in speaking, for instance) might make up for weaknesses in reading and writing, and vice
versa.
The requirement aims to assure that students will acquire a usable level of competence in a second
language. This competence is demonstrated either (a) through successful completion of a fourthlevel language course (fifth-level in Arabic, Chinese or Japanese) or (b) through acceptable
performance on a standardized or departmentally designed examination. Fluent speakers of second
languages may ask to be tested for fulfillment of the requirement or, in the case of languages not
offered at Carleton, may ask that testing be arranged. Students whose native language is other than

12

English may fulfill this requirement by demonstrating competence in their native language, as well
as English.
Entering students may fulfill the requirement by satisfactory performance on a College Board
Advanced Placement or Achievement test, International Baccalaureate Higher Level examination or
on another placement examination most appropriate for the particular language. Students who have
not taken such a test before entering the college should take the language placement examination
either during the summer prior to matriculation or during their first week at Carleton. Students
beginning their study of language, as well as those who need more study to complete the
requirement, should enroll in language in their first year.
Students who complete language courses equivalent to courses 101 through 204 (205 in
Arabic/Chinese/Japanese) at domestic post-secondary institutions after being enrolled at Carleton
may take the appropriate placement or proficiency examinations to gain advanced standing or
exemption. Credit toward the degree is typically not awarded, however.
Language study at Carleton aims at far more than the satisfaction of the requirement. Students are
encouraged to increase their proficiency through advanced courses and study abroad and to apply
their language skills in their academic work in other areas. With this foundation, language will
enrich their studies at Carleton and enable graduates to become contributing members of the multicultural world.
International Studies (IS) – 6 credits: Courses that meet the IS requirement contain a geographic
scope broader than the United States and by pedagogy and/or content develop in students an
understanding of other perspectives on global, comparative, and historical subjects. Courses mostly
focused on the United States but with a notable comparative or transnational component may satisfy
the requirement.
Intercultural Domestic Studies (IDS) – 6 credits: Courses that meet the IDS requirement focus on
the United States. Course content addresses the role of identity and status in shaping the experiences
of American society. Scope of instruction can be historical and comparative and include
opportunities for reflection.
Writing Requirement

The ability to write well is particularly important in college, not only as a means of demonstrating
mastery of material, but as part of the process of coming to that mastery. For many people, writing
well is a life-long learning process. As students develop greater understanding of themselves, the
world, and language, they become more adept at expressing precisely, and perhaps eloquently, what
they have in mind. The Carleton Writing Requirement is meant to be a checkpoint on that journey,
not the final destination. It is a measure of progress and assurance that Carleton students are on the
right path, and that with continued learning, they will develop into fully competent writers by
graduation.
To guide students as they begin to work on writing at the college level, the College has developed
some general criteria for good writing at Carleton. Although individual assignments, genres, or
disciplines may place more or less emphasis on each criterion, faculty agree that student writing
should feature the following:

13
1. The rhetorical strategy should be appropriate for the audience and purpose.
2. If argument is a part of the rhetorical strategy, it should contain a thesis and develop that thesis
with coherence, logic, and evidence.
3. Whatever the purpose, writing should be as clear, concise, and interesting as possible.
4. Narration, description, and reporting should contribute to analysis and synthesis. The parts of a
paper should lead to a greater, connected whole.
5. Writing should be edited to address surface error, including irregularities in grammar, syntax,
diction, and punctuation.

Students are required to successfully complete 1) the AI seminar (WR1), 2) six credits of additional
coursework designated WR2 and 3) successfully complete a writing portfolio to be reviewed by
faculty after the third term, and no later than the sixth term.
For further information, see the Writing Rich Guidelines.
Quantitative Reasoning Encounter (QRE) – Three courses

Students will complete three courses that have been designated as providing quantitative reasoning
encounters (QRE). Quantitative reasoning – the inclination and ability to interpret, assess, and use
quantitative information in one’s scholarly work, civic activities, and personal life – is recognized
by the College as a vital part of a liberal education for each student. Through multiple exposures to
examples of quantitative reasoning a student will better appreciate the ways that quantitative
evidence is developed and used. Courses offering meaningful opportunities for this exposure will be
designated as quantitative reasoning encounters.
The goal of the requirement is to increase students’ appreciation for the power of QR and to
enhance their ability to evaluate, construct, and communicate arguments using quantitative
information. A course designated as a “Quantitative Reasoning Encounter” (QRE) will include at
least one substantial assignment or module designed to enhance one or more of the following QR
skills:
1. Possessing the habit of mind to consider what numerical evidence might add to the analysis of a
problem;
2. Identifying appropriate quantitative or numerical evidence to address a question;
3. Locating or collecting numerical or quantitative data;
4. Interpreting numerical evidence properly including recognizing the limitations of methods and
sources used;
5. Effectively communicating arguments that involve numerical or quantitative evidence.

Since an example of work demonstrating an ability to employ quantitative or numerical evidence in
arguments is an element of the Writing Portfolio, students are strongly advised to take QRE courses
early in their academic careers.
Physical Education

Four terms of Physical Education activity are to be taken by each student. Only one activity per
term may count toward this requirement. The Physical Education program includes a variety of
activity courses, designed to appeal to students. We believe that physical activity can contribute to
students’ health and well-being now and in the future.

14

A Major Field of Study
Carleton students choose a major during the third term of their sophomore year. The number of
credits required of students in major fields varies by department. For a course to count toward the
major, a grade of C- or better must be earned; these courses cannot be taken on an elective
S/CR/NC basis. Departments may make exceptions for extra-departmental courses if appropriate.
Successful completion of an “integrative exercise” in the major (see below), typically during the
senior year, is also a requisite for graduation. With the permission of the Academic Standing
Committee, double majors are allowed.
The following 33 majors are available at Carleton:


































Africana Studies
American Studies
Art History
Art (Studio)
Asian Studies
Biology
Chemistry
Cinema & Media Studies
Classics
Cognitive Science
Computer Science
Economics
English
Environmental Studies
French & Francophone Studies
Gender, Women's & Sexuality Studies
Geology
German
History
Latin American Studies
Linguistics
Mathematics
Music
Philosophy
Physics
Political Science and International Relations
Psychology
Religion
Russian
Sociology/Anthropology
Spanish
Statistics
Theater Arts

Special Majors: A student seeking a major not offered in the College’s established curriculum may
propose a self-designed special major for approval by the Academic Standing Committee. All
special majors involve close consultation with two faculty advisers. Students are expected to

15

petition for special majors during the sixth term of their academic career. For additional
information, see the Registrar's Office.
Integrative Exercises vary from department to department. Intended to help students relate the
subjects they have studied in their major field, they sometimes take the form of comprehensive
examinations covering the fundamentals of the discipline. In other departments, extensive research
projects, papers or public lectures are required. Departments may award a minimum of three and a
maximum of fifteen academic credits for the integrative exercise. For more information, refer to the
individual departmental listing or speak to the department chair.
Academic Regulations
Academic policies are published in the online handbook “Academic Regulations and Procedures”
on the Campus Handbook web page. This is the publication of record in matters regarding academic
policies.
Course Load

Carleton’s academic year is comprised of three 10-week-long terms. Students normally carry 3
courses, or 18 credits, per term; they may take as few as 12 and, on occasion, as many as 22. With
special permission of the Academic Standing Committee, students may carry up to 24, although
such heavy course loads are discouraged.
The standard course unit is six credits. For purposes of transfer evaluation, six credits are
comparable to three and one-third semester hours. Although all standard courses carry equal credit,
laboratory courses at Carleton are equivalent to those in other colleges that grant five semester
hours.
Examinations

Two and a half-hour-long final examinations are held at the end of each term for many courses. The
Registrar sets the testing schedule.
Grades

Carleton’s grading system is as follows:






A=Excellent work of consistently high quality, usually showing notable understanding, insight,
creativity, or skill and few weaknesses
B=Good work of good quality, showing understanding, insight, creativity, or skill
C=Satisfactory work that is adequate, showing readiness to continue study in the field
D=Passing work that is minimally adequate, raising serious concern about readiness to continue in
the field, creditable
F=Failing work that is clearly inadequate, unworthy of credit

In computing grade point averages A = 4.0, A- = 3.67, B+ = 3.33, B = 3.0, B- = 2.67, C+ = 2.33, C
= 2.0, C- = 1.67, D+ = 1.33, D = 1.0, D- = .67, F = 0.

16

A student may elect to take up to 30 credits S/CR/NC (Satisfactory/Credit/No Credit) during their
four years at Carleton, and only up to six credits in any one term. S = A through C-; CR = D+, D,
D-; NC = F.
Courses dropped after the registration drop/add period are recorded on the transcript as “DRP”. This
is a non-punitive notation.
Written Evaluations of Course Work

At the end of any course, a student may request a written evaluation from his or her instructor. The
request must be granted if the course has an enrollment of 20 or fewer students.
Academic Progress

Carleton students are normally expected to complete their work in four years and may be dropped
from the College if they have not earned at least 42 credits and a cumulative GPA of 1.8 at the end
of three terms; 96 credits and a GPA of 2.0 at the end of six terms; and 150 credits; and a GPA of
2.0 at the end of nine terms. (These are the lower limits allowed and do not indicate normal
progress; that is closer to 54 credits, 108 credits and 162 credits, respectively.)
For graduation, a minimum of 210 credits and a GPA of 2.0 is required. A student whose record in
the judgment of the Academic Standing Committee indicates an inability to fulfill the College
requirements for whatever reason may be suspended or dismissed at the end of fall or winter term as
well as at the end of the academic year.
Residence Requirements

Normally it takes four years to complete the work for graduation, of which at least six terms,
including the senior year (last three academic terms), must be spent in residence at Carleton. Some
exceptions to the senior residency rule may be given by the Academic Standing Committee.
Summer Study

Carleton does not ordinarily give degree credit for courses taken elsewhere during the summer.
Permission may occasionally be given if the student cannot otherwise graduate in twelve terms, but
it must be requested in advance from the Academic Standing Committee, and the department chair
may specify at that time that credit will be granted only upon special examination after the
completion of the course. Petition forms are available on the Academic Standing Committee
website. Credit may be earned during the summer on approved off-campus study programs.
Students entering with the class of 2026 should review the Transfer of Credit policy in the
Academic Regulations and Procedures for updates to this policy.
Academic Honors

Students are graduated with “Distinction in a Major” if they achieve distinction in the departmental
integrative exercise and a cumulative grade point average of 3.50 in all departmental courses taken
in the major. Outstanding seniors in the field of music performance will be selected by Music

17

faculty for the “Honors in Music Performance” award. Students who have outstanding records in all
course work will earn the Bachelor of Arts degree with honors. Honors will be awarded to students
with a grade point average in the top 2 percent of their graduating class (summa cum laude), those
in the remainder of the top 15 percent (magna cum laude), and those in the remainder of the top 30
percent (cum laude).
The honor of “Dean’s List” may be earned by first-year students, sophomores and juniors whose
previous academic year’s GPA places them in the top 10 percent of their class. Eligibility for
Dean’s List assumes three terms of academic work, the bulk of which is done at Carleton. Students
on non-Carleton off-campus programs for one term are eligible for Dean’s List if their off-campus
grades are comparable to those they maintained at Carleton. Students off campus for two or more
terms on a non-Carleton program are not eligible in that year. Students on leave for a term are not
eligible in that year. This honor is recognized at Opening Convocation in September of the
following year.
Courses of Instruction
The Departments of Instruction pages list courses offered at the College. They also contain general
information about various departmental programs and their requirements for a major. In addition to
departmental listings, offerings are organized by area studies, which are special courses of study,
and by minors, which represent either an integrated disciplinary or an interdisciplinary program of
study.
Courses are numbered with the following general scheme:


















000‐099 Pre‐College
100 Argument and Inquiry Seminar
101‐199 Introductory
200‐289 Intermediate
290 Independent Reading
291 Independent Study
292 Independent Research
298 Junior Colloquium
300‐389 Advanced
390 Independent Reading
391 Independent Study
392 Independent Research
395 Advanced Seminar
397 Senior Tutorial
398 Senior Colloquium
399 Senior Thesis
400 Integrative Exercise

Independent Study, Reading and Research

Students may pursue independent study, independent research, or independent reading in more than
one term. Ordinarily, this work is not on the introductory level. In some cases, it can be an academic
follow-up to an internship experience. By registration time for the term in which the study is done,
the student is expected to obtain a faculty supervisor in the chosen field of interest and, with their

18

assistance and approval, determine the nature and purpose of the study and the number of credits to
be assigned. Course credit for these various independent study options is determined by
arrangement with the instructor before registration, and may be for one to six credits.
Although not noted separately under departmental course listings, independent study options are
available across the curriculum. Forms are available on the Registrar’s Office website. Independent
study, in any form, does not count toward Argument and Inquiry, Curricular Exploration, Writing,
Quantitative Reasoning Encounter, or Global Citizenship requirements.






Independent Study is an individual, non‐research, directed study in a field of special interest, under
the supervision of a faculty member. It allows a student to pursue an academic interest outside the
listed course offerings, or explore in more depth an area of study that has been encountered in a
previous course. An Independent Study should culminate in several short papers, a single paper, or
any other project acceptable to the supervising faculty member and the student.
Independent Reading: In an Independent Reading, a student will read a body of material, with a
syllabus devised and agreed upon in collaboration with a faculty supervisor. Typically the student
would be expected to meet regularly with the supervising member (for example, weekly).
Independent Research: Independent Research provides an opportunity for a student to pursue
research in a field of special interest, under the supervision of a faculty member or in close
partnership with a faculty member. The research undertaken should be designed as an
investigation yielding original results or a creative product that contributes to the area of
study. While it may not be possible to bring a project to fruition within the confines of our
academic term, an Independent Research course should culminate in the student’s own
contribution to a discipline or field of study, whether in the form of fully‐supported conclusions or
completed creative product, or in the substantive progress toward such a goal.

Advanced Departmental Seminars (395)

Departmental seminars are usually open only to departmental majors, or by consent of the instructor
involved. Because the topics vary from year to year, some students are able to register for more than
one departmental seminar during their college program.
Minors

All students at Carleton must complete an academic major. In addition, students may elect to
complete a minor as part of their academic program. A minor represents either an integrated
disciplinary or an interdisciplinary program of study that may strengthen and complement a major,
but a student pursuing any major can potentially pursue a minor in a different discipline.
Disciplinary minors recognize the students acquisition of in-depth knowledge of a single discipline;
interdisciplinary minors recognize the completion of a program of study that links and integrates
multiple academic disciplines. Minors are also intended to promote communities of learning and
may offer opportunities to relate academic studies to issues that students confront outside of
Carleton. Full descriptions of the minors are included in the alphabetical listing of departments and
programs.
The following 38 minors are offered for the current academic year:



Africana Studies
American Music

19





































Arabic
Archaeology
Art History
Biochemistry
Chinese
Classics
Cognitive Science
Cross‐Cultural Studies
Dance
Digital Arts and Humanities
East Asian Studies
Educational Studies
English Creative Writing
European Studies
French
French and Francophone Studies
Gender, Women's & Sexuality Studies
German
Greek
History
Japanese
Latin
Latin American Studies
Mathematics
Medieval and Renaissance Studies
Middle East Studies
Music
Music Performance
Neuroscience
Philosophy
Public Policy
Religion
Russian
South Asian Studies
Spanish
Theater

Courses at St. Olaf College

By special arrangement a limited number of students may take courses at St. Olaf College which are
not offered at Carleton. Graded course credit will be granted; enrollment requires the permission of
the instructor and the registrar at each institution. For additional information, see the Registrar's
Office.
Requirement Codes

These codes are indicated on each course description or in the schedule of courses:



AI = Argument and Inquiry Seminar (6 credits required)
ARP = Arts Practice (6 credits required)

20












FSR = Formal or Statistical Reasoning (6 credits required)
HI = Humanistic Inquiry (6 credits required)
IDS = Intercultural Domestic Studies (6 credits required)
IS = International Studies (6 credits required)
LA = Literary/Artistic Analysis (6 credits required)
LS = Science with Lab (6 credits required)
NE = No Exploration Credit
QRE = Quantitative Reasoning Encounter (3 courses required)
SI = Social Inquiry (6 credits required)
WR1 = Designates the Writing Component of an AI Seminar
WR2 = Second Writing Rich Course (6 credits required)

Departments of Instruction
Africana Studies
The program in Africana Studies provides a cross-culturally and historically comparative
framework to study the rich connections and exchanges among African people, their descendants,
and the various "new worlds" in which they have made and are making their lives. A particular
strength of Carleton's Africana Studies program is the opportunity to explore these issues on the
African continent as well as in numerous African diasporas--of varying historical depth--in the
Americas, Europe, Asia, and the Middle East. Africana Studies combines area studies and ethnic
studies foci on the cultural, literary, political, social, and intellectual responses to slavery,
colonialism, missionization, and racialization throughout Africa and its many diasporas.
Students can pursue their intellectual interests in Africa and its diasporas through on-campus
courses and off-campus studies programs (including programs offered through Carleton's
departments of History and Environmental Studies), and through a rich variety of courses in nearly
all curricular exploration divisions. Through multidisciplinary training, students are encouraged to
develop their analytic, research, and literary skills; they acquire the intellectual tools to critique and
correct the distortions and silences about Africans and their descendants in both academic canons
and public discourse.
The Africana Studies major thus prepares students for lifetime engagement in scholarship as well as
in fields such as law, public policy, education, public health, social work, and the arts. Toward this
end, and in addition to coursework, students are encouraged to take advantage of the rich array of
speakers, exhibits, co-curricular, and extracurricular activities related to Africans and their
diasporas.
Students majoring in Africana Studies create their own program of study by choosing courses in a
structured and reflective manner from a variety of disciplinary departments, complementing some
core Africana Studies courses. In developing their program, students should talk to the department
about courses that have particularly high African, African Diaspora, and/or African American
Studies content. They are particularly encouraged to choose these courses from among the list of
relevant courses. Courses marked AFSTPERT can complement the major, but do not count toward
the required nine courses plus comprehensive exercise without special permission of the Program
Director. Because of the complexities of creating a meaningful program from a wide array of

21

departmental offerings, students interested in majoring should draw up a program of study that has
breadth and depth in consultation with the Director of Africana Studies before declaring their major.
Requirements for the Africana Studies Major
Admission to the program will depend upon the acceptance, by the Africana Studies Committee, of
a written proposal outlining the student's program of study. Courses cannot double count for two
requirements.
The Africana Studies major requires 63 credits:


Interdisciplinary Course (6 credits). Each student must complete one interdisciplinary 6‐credit
course which, in part, specifically discusses Africana Studies as an interdisciplinary field:
o AFST 112 Black Revolution on Campus (not offered in 2022‐23)
o AFST 113 Introduction to Africana Studies
o AFST 115 Black Heroism in the Diaspora and Early America (not offered in 2022‐23)
o AFST 120 Race and Racism Outside the U.S.
o AFST 230 Black Diaspora, Politics of Place (not offered in 2022‐23)
o POSC 275 Black Radical Political Thought, 1919‐1969 (not offered in 2022‐23)



Survey Courses (18 credits). Each student must take three of the following 6‐credit courses:
o AFST 112 Black Revolution on Campus (not offered in 2022‐23)
o AFST 113 Introduction to Africana Studies
o AFST 120 Race and Racism Outside the U.S.
o AFST 210 Historiographies of Slavery (not offered in 2022‐23)
o AFST 215 Contemporary Theory in Black Studies (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ARTH 140 African Art and Culture
o ENGL 117 African American Literature (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 238 African Literature in English (not offered in 2022‐23)
o HIST 126 African American History II
o HIST 181 West Africa in the Era of the Slave Trade (not offered in 2022‐23)
o HIST 183 History of Early West Africa (not offered in 2022‐23)
o HIST 184 Colonial West Africa (not offered in 2022‐23)
o HIST 284 History, Culture and Commerce Program: Heritage in Africa and Arabia (not
offered in 2022‐23)
o POSC 239 The Poor and the Powerless (not offered in 2022‐23)
o SOAN 108 In & Out of Africa: How Transnational Black Lives Matter (not offered in 2022‐23)



Distribution Courses (30 credits). Each student should take 30 credits of distribution that are
essential to Africana Studies. Among these distribution courses, students must choose at least one
6‐credit course each from among the three disciplinary groups: Humanistic Inquiry, Social Inquiry
and Literary and Artistic Analysis; at least four of the distribution courses must be at the 200‐level
or above and at least one at the 300‐level. The 300‐level course should be completed in one of the
two disciplines in which the student writes his/her comprehensive exercise; in this course the
student must produce a substantial paper or project in Africana Studies. In addition, majors are
highly encouraged to take the AMST 345 junior methods course, GWSS 200, or a methods course in
one of the academic disciplines that contribute to Africana Studies. Course cannot double count for
two requirements.
Literary and Artistic Analysis

22
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o

DANC 266 Reading The Dancing Body (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 230 Studies in African American Literature: From the 1950s to the Present
ENGL 233 Writing and Social Justice (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 238 African Literature in English (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 252 Caribbean Fiction (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 258 Playwrights of Color: Taking the Stage
ENGL 350 The Postcolonial Novel: Forms and Contexts
ENGL 352 Toni Morrison: Novelist (not offered in 2022‐23)
FREN 245 Francophone Literature of Africa and the Caribbean
FREN 308 France and the African Imagination (not offered in 2022‐23)
FREN 395 The Mande of West Africa (not offered in 2022‐23)
MUSC 126 America's Music
MUSC 130 The History of Jazz (not offered in 2022‐23)
MUSC 131 The Blues From the Delta to Chicago (not offered in 2022‐23)
MUSC 140 Ethnomusicology and the World's Music
MUSC 232 Golden Age of R & B (not offered in 2022‐23)
MUSC 334 Marvin Gaye (not offered in 2022‐23)

Humanistic Inquiry
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o

AFST 115 Black Heroism in the Diaspora and Early America (not offered in 2022‐23)
AFST 130 Global Islam and Blackness (not offered in 2022‐23)
AFST 210 Historiographies of Slavery (not offered in 2022‐23)
GWSS 265 Black Feminist Thought (not offered in 2022‐23)
GWSS 289 Pleasure, Intimacy, Violence (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 125 African American History I: From Africa to the Civil War
HIST 127 The Roaring Twenties & the Rough Thirties in U.S. History (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 181 West Africa in the Era of the Slave Trade (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 184 Colonial West Africa (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 214 Sport and the Color Line (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 218 Black Women's History (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 219 Black Revolutions in the Atlantic World (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 221 Nat Turner, Booker T. Washington, and Fannie Lou Hamer in History and Memory
(not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 223 The Presidents and their Slaves (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 225 James Baldwin and Black Lives Matter (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 228 Civil Rights and Black Power
HIST 230 Black Americans and the U.S. Civil War and Reconstruction
HIST 281 War in Modern Africa (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 282 African Diaspora in Arabia (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 284 History, Culture and Commerce Program: Heritage in Africa and Arabia (not
offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 285 History, Culture and Commerce Program: Critical Historical Research (not offered
in 2022‐23)
HIST 382 Slavery & Abolition in Africa and its Diaspora (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 383 Africa's Colonial Legacies (not offered in 2022‐23)
PHIL 228 Freedom and Alienation in Black American Philosophy (not offered in 2022‐23)
PHIL 260 Critical Philosophy of Race (not offered in 2022‐23)

23
o
o
o

PHIL 305 Frederick Douglass: The Philosophies of a Slave, Citizen, and Diplomat (not offered
in 2022‐23)
RELG 211 Race and Religion: Slavery, Colonialism, and their Afterlives (not offered in 2022‐
23)
RELG 227 Liberation Theologies (not offered in 2022‐23)

Social Inquiry
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o

AFST 112 Black Revolution on Campus (not offered in 2022‐23)
AFST 220 Color, Class, and Status in Black America
EDUC 225 Issues in Urban Education
EDUC 245 The History of American School Reform (not offered in 2022‐23)
EDUC 338 Multicultural Education
GWSS 250 Politics of Reproductive Justice
HIST 128 Slavery and Universities: Past and Present (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 218 Schools, Scholarship and Policy in the United States (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 239 The Poor and the Powerless (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 266 Urban Political Economy (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 273 Race and Politics in the U.S.
POSC 275 Black Radical Political Thought, 1919‐1969 (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 302 Subordinated Politics and Intergroup Relations*
POSC 366 Urban Political Economy* (not offered in 2022‐23)
PSYC 384 Psychology of Prejudice
SOAN 108 In & Out of Africa: How Transnational Black Lives Matter (not offered in 2022‐23)
SOAN 151 Global Minnesota: An Anthropology of Our State (not offered in 2022‐23)
SOAN 214 Neighborhoods and Cities: Inequalities and Identities
SOAN 225 Social Movements (not offered in 2022‐23)
SOAN 256 Africa: Representation and Conflict
SOAN 263 Terrorism (not offered in 2022‐23)
SOAN 272 Sociological Perspectives on Race and Ethnicity in the United States (not offered
in 2022‐23)
SOAN 310 Sociology of Mass Incarceration
SOAN 314 Contemporary Issues in Critical Criminology (not offered in 2022‐23)
SOAN 326 Ecology and Anthropology Tanzania Program: Cultural Anthropology of East
Africa
SOAN 395 Ethnography of Reproduction (not offered in 2022‐23)

Additional Distribution Electives: Arts Practice
o
o
o
o
o
o
o


DANC 301 West African Dance
MUSC 183 World Drumming Instruction
MUSC 183J World Drumming Instruction (Juried)
MUSC 192 West African Drum Ensemble
MUSC 199 Fundamentals of African Drumming
MUSC 283 World Drumming Instruction
MUSC 283J World Drumming Instruction (Juried)

Senior Seminar/Capstone Experience (3 credits)

24

This 3-credit course gives Africana Studies majors and minors the opportunity to apply what they
have learned by preparing for and presenting at the annual National Council for Black Studies
(NCBS) conference. Under the guidance of Africana Studies faculty members, students will
interrogate the origins and institutionalization of Africana Studies; revise an Africana Studiesthemed research paper completed in a previous course into a conference paper; and prepare and
submit a paper proposal for NCBS. At NCBS, students will present their own research and engage
with the work of Africana Studies scholars at panels, plenaries and workshops. Afterward, they will
write a short assessment of the conference and their experience in Africana Studies at Carleton.


Comprehensive Exercise AFST 400 (6 credits)

The comprehensive exercise is a substantial (approximately 34-40 page) research paper on a topic
within African, African American, and/or African Diaspora studies, grounded in two
complementary disciplines, advised by two faculty members chosen from these two disciplines. The
student should have completed a 300-level course in one of these two disciplines. The comps
process begins with a proposal in fall term of the senior year, and ends with a final written thesis
and oral presentation early in spring term.
Other Courses Pertinent to Africana Studies












ARTH 160 American Art to 1940 (not offered in 2022‐23)
CLAS 220 From the Horn to Melqart’s Pillars: African Perspectives in the Ancient Mediterranean
ECON 240 Microeconomics of Development
EDUC 340 Race, Immigration, and Schools
ENGL 234 Literature of the American South (not offered in 2022‐23)
FREN 246 Contemporary Senegal (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 304 Black Study and the University (not offered in 2022‐23)
MUSC 136 History of Rock
POSC 122 Politics in America: Liberty and Equality
POSC 241 Ethnic Conflict (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 122 Introduction to Islam (not offered in 2022‐23)

African Studies Minor
The Africana Studies minor is designed to complement a student's disciplinary major through an
interdisciplinary specialization on the contexts and experiences of Africans and their many
diasporas. Combining area studies and ethnic studies foci, the Africana Studies minor provides
students the opportunity to explore the rich connections and exchanges among African people, their
descendants, and the global locales--in the Americas, Europe, Asia, and the Middle East--in which
they have made and are making their lives. Students can do this through both on-campus courses
and off-campus studies programs. In their senior year Africana Studies minors draw connections
among these courses through an interdisciplinary reflective capstone experience.
Fostering interdisciplinary critical thinking, the Africana Studies minor prepares students for
lifetime engagement in scholarship as well as in fields such as law, public policy, education, public
health, social work, and the arts. Toward this end, and in addition to coursework, students are
encouraged to take advantage of the rich array of speakers, exhibits, co-curricular, and
extracurricular activities related to Africans and their diasporas.

25

Africana Studies Minor Requirements
The Africana Studies minor requires 39 credits (seven courses) as follows. Courses cannot double
count for two requirements.
One core interdisciplinary (6-credit) course which, in part, specifically discusses Africana Studies
as a coherent field of study.







AFST 112 Black Revolution on Campus (not offered in 2022‐23)
AFST 113 Introduction to Africana Studies
AFST 115 Black Heroism in the Diaspora and Early America (not offered in 2022‐23)
AFST 120 Race and Racism Outside the U.S.
AFST 230 Black Diaspora, Politics of Place (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 275 Black Radical Political Thought, 1919‐1969 (not offered in 2022‐23)

Two survey courses (12 credits) that introduce the "state of the field" of African and/or African
Diaspora studies within specific disciplines
















AFST 112 Black Revolution on Campus (not offered in 2022‐23)
AFST 113 Introduction to Africana Studies
AFST 120 Race and Racism Outside the U.S.
AFST 210 Historiographies of Slavery (not offered in 2022‐23)
AFST 215 Contemporary Theory in Black Studies (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARTH 140 African Art and Culture
ENGL 117 African American Literature (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 238 African Literature in English (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 126 African American History II
HIST 181 West Africa in the Era of the Slave Trade (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 183 History of Early West Africa (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 184 Colonial West Africa (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 284 History, Culture and Commerce Program: Heritage in Africa and Arabia (not offered in
2022‐23)
POSC 239 The Poor and the Powerless (not offered in 2022‐23)
SOAN 108 In & Out of Africa: How Transnational Black Lives Matter (not offered in 2022‐23)

Three distribution courses (18 credits) that combine depth and breadth in the field. Each student
should take 18 credits chosen from at least two of the following disciplinary groups: Literary and
Artistic Analysis; Humanistic Inquiry and Social Inquiry. Two of the three distributional courses
must be at the 200-level or above. At least one of the distribution courses should be a 300-level
course in which the student produces a substantial paper or project in Africana Studies
encompassing African, African American and African Diaspora Studies. In rare cases, a student can
petition to write a substantial paper in a 200-level course (i.e., be released from the 300-level course
requirement), if that course is highly relevant to their own focus.


Literary/Artistic Analysis
o DANC 266 Reading the Dancing Body (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 230 Studies in African American Literature: From the 1950s to the Present
o ENGL 233 Writing and Social Justice (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 238 African Literature in English (not offered in 2022‐23)

26
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o

ENGL 252 Caribbean Fiction (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 258 Playwrights of Color: Taking the Stage
ENGL 350 The Postcolonial Novel: Forms and Contexts
ENGL 352 Toni Morrison: Novelist (not offered in 2022‐23)
FREN 245 Francophone Literature of Africa and the Caribbean
FREN 308 France and the African Imagination (not offered in 2022‐23)
FREN 395 The Mande of West Africa (not offered in 2022‐23)
MUSC 126 America's Music
MUSC 130 The History of Jazz (not offered in 2022‐23)
MUSC 131 The Blues From the Delta to Chicago (not offered in 2022‐23)
MUSC 140 Ethnomusicology and the World's Music
MUSC 232 Golden Age of R & B (not offered in 2022‐23)
MUSC 334 Marvin Gaye (not offered in 2022‐23)



Humanistic Inquiry
o AFST 115 Black Heroism in the Diaspora and Early America (not offered in 2022‐23)
o AFST 130 Global Islam and Blackness (not offered in 2022‐23)
o AFST 210 Historiographies of Slavery (not offered in 2022‐23)
o GWSS 265 Black Feminist Thought (not offered in 2022‐23)
o GWSS 289 Pleasure, Intimacy, Violence (not offered in 2022‐23)
o HIST 125 African American History I: From Africa to the Civil War
o HIST 127 The Roaring Twenties & the Rough Thirties in U.S. History (not offered in 2022‐23)
o HIST 181 West Africa in the Era of the Slave Trade (not offered in 2022‐23)
o HIST 184 Colonial West Africa (not offered in 2022‐23)
o HIST 214 Sport and the Color Line (not offered in 2022‐23)
o HIST 218 Black Women's History (not offered in 2022‐23)
o HIST 219 Black Revolutions in the Atlantic World (not offered in 2022‐23)
o HIST 221 Nat Turner, Booker T. Washington, and Fannie Lou Hamer in History and Memory
(not offered in 2022‐23)
o HIST 223 The Presidents and their Slaves (not offered in 2022‐23)
o HIST 225 James Baldwin and Black Lives Matter (not offered in 2022‐23)
o HIST 228 Civil Rights and Black Power
o HIST 230 Black Americans and the U.S. Civil War and Reconstruction
o HIST 281 War in Modern Africa (not offered in 2022‐23)
o HIST 282 African Diaspora in Arabia (not offered in 2022‐23)
o HIST 284 History, Culture and Commerce Program: Heritage in Africa and Arabia (not
offered in 2022‐23)
o HIST 285 History, Culture and Commerce Program: Critical Historical Research (not offered
in 2022‐23)
o HIST 382 Slavery & Abolition in Africa and its Diaspora (not offered in 2022‐23)
o HIST 383 Africa's Colonial Legacies (not offered in 2022‐23)
o PHIL 228 Freedom and Alienation in Black American Philosophy (not offered in 2022‐23)
o PHIL 260 Critical Philosophy of Race (not offered in 2022‐23)
o PHIL 305 Frederick Douglass: The Philosophies of a Slave, Citizen, and Diplomat (not offered
in 2022‐23)
o RELG 211 Race and Religion: Slavery, Colonialism, and their Afterlives (not offered in 2022‐
23)
o RELG 227 Liberation Theologies (not offered in 2022‐23)



Social Inquiry

27
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o


AFST 112 Black Revolution on Campus (not offered in 2022‐23)
AFST 220 Color, Class, and Status in Black America
EDUC 225 Issues in Urban Education
EDUC 245 The History of American School Reform (not offered in 2022‐23)
EDUC 338 Multicultural Education
GWSS 250 Politics of Reproductive Justice
HIST 128 Slavery and Universities: Past and Present (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 218 Schools, Scholarship and Policy in the United States (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 239 The Poor and the Powerless (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 266 Urban Political Economy (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 273 Race and Politics in the U.S.
POSC 275 Black Radical Political Thought, 1919‐1969 (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 302 Subordinated Politics and Intergroup Relations*
POSC 366 Urban Political Economy* (not offered in 2022‐23)
PSYC 384 Psychology of Prejudice
SOAN 108 In & Out of Africa: How Transnational Black Lives Matter (not offered in 2022‐23)
SOAN 151 Global Minnesota: An Anthropology of Our State (not offered in 2022‐23)
SOAN 214 Neighborhoods and Cities: Inequalities and Identities
SOAN 225 Social Movements (not offered in 2022‐23)
SOAN 256 Africa: Representation and Conflict
SOAN 263 Terrorism (not offered in 2022‐23)
SOAN 272 Sociological Perspectives on Race and Ethnicity in the United States (not offered
in 2022‐23)
SOAN 310 Sociology of Mass Incarceration
SOAN 314 Contemporary Issues in Critical Criminology (not offered in 2022‐23)
SOAN 326 Ecology and Anthropology Tanzania Program: Cultural Anthropology of East
Africa
SOAN 395 Ethnography of Reproduction (not offered in 2022‐23)

Additional Distribution Electives:
o DANC 301 West African Dance
o MUSC 183 World Drumming Instruction
o MUSC 183J World Drumming Instruction (Juried)
o MUSC 192 West African Drum Ensemble
o MUSC 199 Fundamentals of African Drumming
o MUSC 283 World Drumming Instruction
o MUSC 283J World Drumming Instruction (Juried)

Senior Seminar/Capstone Experience (3 credits)


AFST 398 Africana Studies Capstone

This 3‐credit course gives Africana Studies majors and minors the opportunity to apply what they have
learned by preparing for and presenting at the annual National Council for Black Studies (NCBS) conference.
Under the guidance of Africana Studies faculty members, students will interrogate the origins and
institutionalization of Africana Studies; revise an Africana Studies‐themed research paper completed in a
previous course into a conference paper; and prepare and submit a paper proposal for NCBS. At NCBS,
students will present their own research and engage with the work of Africana Studies scholars at panels,

28
plenaries and workshops. Afterward, they will write a short assessment of the conference and their
experience in Africana Studies at Carleton.

Minors are highly encouraged to take the AMST 345 junior methods course.
Africana Studies Courses
AFST 112 Black Revolution on Campus This course explores the activist roots of Africana Studies. In the late
1960s and early 1970s, students organized hundreds of protests that sparked a period of unrest, retaliation,
negotiation, and reform that fundamentally reshaped college campuses across the United States. Black
students, along with their “Third World” and progressive white allies, demanded that academe serve their
communities and provide a “more relevant education.” The course will consider the influence of various
movements, including Black power, anti‐war, second wave feminism, and decolonization, on the creation of
interdisciplinary fields including Black Studies, Ethnic Studies, and Women and Gender Studies. 6 credits; SI,
WR2, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
AFST 113 Introduction to Africana Studies This course focuses on the histories, ideas, experiences, and
dreams that have shaped the lives of people of African descent. Then and now perspectives will define our
exploration of incarceration and freedom; migration and emigration; separatism versus integration; race
and class; art and politics. Discussion topics and seminal ideas will be drawn from texts including the
following: the anthology Call and Response (on key debates in Black studies); the historical memoir Lose
Your Mother (chronicling a journey along the Atlantic slave route); a work of fiction Middle Passage (that
tells a story of enslavement, revolt, and redemption). 6 credits; HI, IDS; Spring; Kofi Owusu
AFST 115 Black Heroism in the Diaspora and Early America This course examines motifs of Black Heroism
throughout the Trans Atlantic Slave Trade and Early America. We take an interdisciplinary and Black Studies
approach to topics like slave life and maroonage, freedom suits, military enlistment, and more. The course
material will include fiction like Frederick Douglass' The Heroic Slave as well as theoretical texts like Neil
Roberts Freedom as Maroonage. The aim of the course is to provide a look at the multifacted lives of Black
people in the diaspora and early America with an emphasis on complex and quotidian resistance to
domination. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
AFST 120 Race and Racism Outside the U.S. In this course, we examine the ways that race structures
difference and inequality in non‐U.S. contexts with varying degrees of racial “diversity.” As a construct
fundamentally grounded in white supremacy through encounters between Europe and its “Others,” race
from its inception has been a global construct for organizing and stratifying human difference. Yet the
specific ways that race is constructed varies across societies, with ethnicity and other related concepts of
difference substituting for race. Foundational to this course will be how the notions of blackness and
whiteness figure into the creation of racial categories, boundaries, and inequalities. Course topics include
skin color stratification, “colorblindness,” ethnicity and nationhood, migration and citizenship, media
representations, anti‐blackness as a global phenomenon, transnational and global flows of racial ideas and
categories, and social movements for racial justice. 6 credits; NE, WR2, IS; Fall; Daniel Williams
AFST 130 Global Islam and Blackness This course will introduce students to key trends and moments in
Islamic thought and activism in Africa and the black diaspora. It explores the historical construction of the
categories of “race” and “religion” through a focus on Islam and blackness. We will analyze how blackness
and Islam, and their relationship, has been conceptualized and presented by non‐Africans, as well as the
history of Islam in Africa and in the black diaspora. We will explore the construction of blackness within

29
Islamic history and cultures, highlighting the notion of the Moor in medieval times and the Nation of Islam
in U.S. history. 6 credits; SI, WR2, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
AFST 210 Historiographies of Slavery This survey course explores how Black enslaved and ex‐enslaved
people narrated their experiences of chattel slavery, and its immediate aftermath, in America. Stretching
beyond a focus on only traditional historical slave narratives, this course adopts an interdisciplinary
approach to slavery that utilizes philosophy, literature, and media studies. Reading and media for the
course may include Harriet Jacobs' Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl, selections William Still's The
Underground Railroad and the WPA Slave Narrative Collection, the film 12 Years a Slave and the miniseries
Roots, and Zora Neale Hurston's Barracoon: The Story of the Last "Black Cargo." 6 credits; HI, WR2, IDS; Not
offered 2022‐23
AFST 215 Contemporary Theory in Black Studies This course examines the work of a major theorist in the
Black intellectual tradition within the last seventy years. Students are invited to take a dedicated dive into
primary scholarship by focusing on a figure such as bell hooks, Derrick Bell, Angela Davis, Charles Mills,
Saidiya Hartman, Frank Wilderson, Maya Angelou, Henry Louis Gates Jr, Audre Lorde, James Baldwin, Zora
Neale Hurston, and/or Cornel West. Students should expect an opportunity to examine primary scholarship
and build analytical skills to trace themes and methods. This year's focus will be on ethical, social, and
political theory of bell hooks (1952 ‐ 2021). 6 credits; HI, WR2, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
AFST 220 Color, Class, and Status in Black America as a racial category and identity, "Black" is often treated
in a homogenous, monolithic way, obscuring the internal diversity and inequality within the black
population in the U.S. In this course, we consider the inequalities within black communities and the black
population living in the U.S., historically and through to the present. "Colorism," or skin tone stratification,
represents one status linked to class and ranking in society; but does colorism matter more than other
statuses to class? Class differences are in fact profound within black communities, and they are correlated
to multiple social statuses‐‐skin tone, immigrant status, national origin, and even political orientation. We
will examine how these status, color, and class interact, and how they shape class relations and tensions,
lived experience, and notions of authenticity ("blackness") in everday life and popular culture. Course topics
include the Black middle class; education; neighborhood segregation; gender and sexuality; and media
representations and popular culture. 6 credits; NE, WR2, QRE, IDS; Spring; Daniel Williams
AFST 230 Black Diaspora, Politics of Place Central to diasporic identity formation and imagination is the
simultaneous belonging to a multiplicity of places. For black diasporic subjects, struggles against oppression
and for new political futures inspire transgression against normative political boundaries. This class
explores the role of place and politics in the making of the black diaspora in Europe and the Americas. It
emphasizes the intellectual and political connections and the sense of shared identity and destiny. Through
an interdisciplinary approach, this course will offer a global history of race, identity, and politics through the
lens of the black diaspora. 6 credits; HI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
AFST 398 Africana Studies Capstone This course gives Africana Studies majors and minors the opportunity
to apply what they have learned by preparing for and presenting at the annual National Council for Black
Studies (NCBS) conference. Under the guidance of Africana Studies faculty members, students will
interrogate the origins and institutionalization of Africana Studies; revise an Africana Studies‐themed
research paper completed in a previous course into a conference paper; and prepare and submit a paper
proposal for NCBS. At NCBS, students will present their own research and engage with the work of Africana
Studies scholars at panels, plenaries and workshops. Afterward, they will write a short assessment of the
conference and their experience in Africana Studies at Carleton. 3 credits; NE; Fall; Kofi Owusu

30
AFST 400 Integrative Exercise 1‐6 credit; S/NC; Fall, Winter, Spring; Chérif Keïta

American Studies
This program is designed to encourage and support the interdisciplinary study of American culture.
It draws upon the expertise of faculty in various disciplines and strives to understand the
institutions, values, and beliefs that have shaped the experiences of U.S. residents. Recognizing the
diverse and pluralistic nature of our society, the American Studies program enables the student to
construct an interdisciplinary major around topics of the student's own choice such as urban studies,
ethnicity, media, religion, gender roles, environmental thought or some other aspect of the
American experience. The program supports interdisciplinary courses taught by Carleton faculty
and it brings to campus nationally known visiting artists and scholars under the auspices of the Fred
C. Andersen Foundation.
Requirements for the American Studies Major
American Studies is an interdisciplinary major which a student constructs from offerings in two or
more departments of instruction. Students take both core courses in the field of American Studies
and additional courses from one of five broad, thematic streams (listed below). This theme will both
provide additional structure and points of comparison and a foundation for a comprehensive
exercise.
Majors must complete 69 credits in the following general areas:
I. Core Courses: Each student must complete all of these:








AMST 115 Introduction to American Studies or AMST 287 California Art and Visual Culture (offered
as part of the "Visions of California" OCS Program) one or the other of these is a prerequisite for
AMST 345 and AMST 396.
AMST 345 Theory and Practice of American Studies
AMST 396 Junior Research Seminar
AMST 398 Advanced Research in American Studies
AMST 399 Senior Seminar in American Studies
AMST 400 Colloquium and Integrative Exercise in American Studies (3 credits, to be taken in winter
term of the senior year, along with AMST 399.) A senior may choose:
o Essay or Project Option: a 35‐40 page essay on an approved topic; or an approved project
(e.g., a critical documentary, radio narrative, web design project, performance piece, or
academic civic engagement project) accompanied by a 15‐20 page essay. Open only to
students who receive approval of a project prospectus.
o Examination Option: A written examination given early in spring term

II. Survey Courses: Students must take three survey courses. Two of these courses must come
from a single department. Students will also take a one-term survey course from a different
department. Because the entire range of these survey courses is not offered every year, students
should consult the online catalog and plan accordingly.



HIST 116 Intro to Indigenous Histories, 1887‐present (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 122 U.S. Women's History to 1877 (not offered in 2022‐23)

31





HIST 123 U.S. Women's History Since 1877 (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 125 African American History I: From Africa to the Civil War
HIST 126 African American History II
POSC 272 Constitutional Law II

One-term survey courses:











AMST 254 The 1930s: Social and Cultural Impact of the Great Depression (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARTH 160 American Art to 1940 (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 117 African American Literature (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 120 American Short Stories (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 212 Nineteenth‐Century American Literature (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 215 Modern American Literature (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 235 Asian American Literature
MUSC 126 America's Music
POSC 122 Politics in America: Liberty and Equality
RELG 140 Religion and American Culture (not offered in 2022‐23)

III. Topical Courses: Each student must take twenty-four credits that deal with elements of the
American experience from one of the thematic streams below. Courses that will fulfill this
requirement are listed under each group. No more than six of these credits may be from a 100-level
course. (Survey courses above and beyond those used to satisfy the required one-term and two-term
sequences may count as a Topical Course.) Students must take courses from at least two
departments. In order that majors acquire the research skills necessary to complete the major, six of
these twenty-four credits must be at the 300-level.


Race, Ethnicity and Indigeneity: What is the relationship between race and ethnicity and U.S.
cultures? Students will look at these questions in a comparative and interdisciplinary framework.
Concentrators in this area should take a combination of courses that will allow them to
comparatively assess the experiences of at least two ethno‐racial groups in America.
o AFST 112 Black Revolution on Campus (not offered in 2022‐23)
o AMST 130 Latinx Social Movements: From Bandits to the Young Lords (not offered in 2022‐
23)
o AMST 204 What’s Race Got To Do With It?: Constructing Communities that Discard Lives
(not offered in 2022‐23)
o AMST 214 Music in the 1970s (not offered in 2022‐23)
o AMST 225 Beauty and Race in America (not offered in 2022‐23)
o AMST 231 Contemporary Indigenous Activism (not offered in 2022‐23)
o AMST 244 Approaches to Indigenous Studies (not offered in 2022‐23)
o AMST 248 Confine and Detain: The Carceral State in America
o AMST 267 Utopia, Dystopia, and Myopia: Suburbia in Fiction and Scholarship (not offered in
2022‐23)
o AMST 269 Woodstock Nation (not offered in 2022‐23)
o AMST 325 Labor and Identity in America (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ECON 262 The Economics of Sports
o EDUC 330 Refugee and Immigrant Experiences in Faribault, MN (not offered in 2022‐23)
o EDUC 338 Multicultural Education
o EDUC 340 Race, Immigration, and Schools
o EDUC 344 Teenage Wasteland: Adolescence and the American High School (not offered in
2022‐23)

32
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o

ENGL 117 African American Literature (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 119 Introduction to U.S. Latino/a Literature (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 212 Nineteenth‐Century American Literature (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 227 Imagining the Borderlands
ENGL 230 Studies in African American Literature: From the 1950s to the Present
ENGL 233 Writing and Social Justice (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 234 Literature of the American South (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 235 Asian American Literature
ENGL 239 Democracy: Politics, Race, & Sex in Nineteenth Century American Novels (not
offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 241 Latinx Voices in the Age of Trump
ENGL 248 Visions of California (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 252 Caribbean Fiction (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 253 Food Writing: History, Culture, Practice
ENGL 258 Playwrights of Color: Taking the Stage
ENGL 352 Toni Morrison: Novelist (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENTS 210 Environmental Justice
GWSS 250 Politics of Reproductive Justice
GWSS 265 Black Feminist Thought (not offered in 2022‐23)
GWSS 289 Pleasure, Intimacy, Violence (not offered in 2022‐23)
GWSS 398 Capstone: Race, Gender, and Sexuality in Popular Culture
HIST 116 Intro to Indigenous Histories, 1887‐present (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 122 U.S. Women's History to 1877 (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 123 U.S. Women's History Since 1877 (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 125 African American History I: From Africa to the Civil War
HIST 126 African American History II
HIST 127 The Roaring Twenties & the Rough Thirties in U.S. History (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 203 American Indian Education (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 211 Revolts and Resistance in Early America (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 212 The Era of the American Revolution
HIST 214 Sport and the Color Line (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 218 Black Women's History (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 225 James Baldwin and Black Lives Matter (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 228 Civil Rights and Black Power
HIST 275 Latin American Immigration to the US
HIST 301 Indigenous Histories at Carleton (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 316 Presenting America's Founding (not offered in 2022‐23)
MUSC 126 America's Music
MUSC 130 The History of Jazz (not offered in 2022‐23)
MUSC 131 The Blues From the Delta to Chicago (not offered in 2022‐23)
MUSC 136 History of Rock
MUSC 232 Golden Age of R & B (not offered in 2022‐23)
MUSC 247 1950s/60s American Folk Music Revival
PHIL 228 Freedom and Alienation in Black American Philosophy (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 122 Politics in America: Liberty and Equality
POSC 202 Tools of National Power: Statecraft and Diplomatic Power (not offered in 2022‐
23)
POSC 204 How American Campaigns and Elections Work (and Don’t Work)
POSC 218 Schools, Scholarship and Policy in the United States (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 271 Constitutional Law I

33
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o



POSC 272 Constitutional Law II
POSC 273 Race and Politics in the U.S.
POSC 275 Black Radical Political Thought, 1919‐1969 (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 302 Subordinated Politics and Intergroup Relations*
POSC 306 Identity Politics and Group Behavior in America*
POSC 339 LGBTQ Politics in America (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 355 Identity, Culture and Rights* (not offered in 2022‐23)
PSYC 384 Psychology of Prejudice
RELG 100 American Pilgrimages
RELG 239 Religion & American Landscape (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 285 Islam in America: Race, Religion and Politics (not offered in 2022‐23)
SOAN 114 Modern Families: An Introduction to the Sociology of the Family (not offered in
2022‐23)
o SOAN 151 Global Minnesota: An Anthropology of Our State (not offered in 2022‐23)
o SOAN 206 Critical Perspectives on Work in the Twenty‐first Century (not offered in 2022‐
23)
o SOAN 225 Social Movements (not offered in 2022‐23)
o SOAN 272 Sociological Perspectives on Race and Ethnicity in the United States (not offered
in 2022‐23)
o SOAN 278 Urban Ethnography and the American Experience
o SOAN 288 Diversity, Democracy, Inequality in America (not offered in 2022‐23)
o SOAN 310 Sociology of Mass Incarceration
o SOAN 325 Sociology of Adoption and Assisted Reproduction (not offered in 2022‐23)
o THEA 227 Theatre for Social Change
Democracy, Activism, and Class: How does a longstanding American Studies emphasis on engaged
scholarship reveal the relationships of politics, capitalism and power? This theme investigates the
emergence of social groups and their political struggles at the local and national levels emphasizing
the themes of power, inequality, and social justice.
o AMST 100 Walt Whitman's New York City
o AMST 130 Latinx Social Movements: From Bandits to the Young Lords (not offered in 2022‐
23)
o AMST 231 Contemporary Indigenous Activism (not offered in 2022‐23)
o AMST 248 Confine and Detain: The Carceral State in America
o AMST 254 The 1930s: Social and Cultural Impact of the Great Depression (not offered in
2022‐23)
o AMST 256 Walt Whitman's New York (not offered in 2022‐23)
o AMST 267 Utopia, Dystopia, and Myopia: Suburbia in Fiction and Scholarship (not offered in
2022‐23)
o AMST 269 Woodstock Nation (not offered in 2022‐23)
o AMST 325 Labor and Identity in America (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ARTH 247 Architecture Since 1950 (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ARTH 341 Art and Democracy (not offered in 2022‐23)
o CAMS 225 Film Noir: The Dark Side of the American Dream
o CAMS 270 Nonfiction
o ECON 264 Health Care Economics
o ECON 270 Economics of the Public Sector
o ECON 271 Economics of Natural Resources and the Environment
o EDUC 245 The History of American School Reform (not offered in 2022‐23)
o EDUC 250 Fixing Schools: Politics and Policy in American Education (not offered in 2022‐23)
o EDUC 330 Refugee and Immigrant Experiences in Faribault, MN (not offered in 2022‐23)

34
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o

EDUC 340 Race, Immigration, and Schools
ENGL 230 Studies in African American Literature: From the 1950s to the Present
ENGL 233 Writing and Social Justice (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 239 Democracy: Politics, Race, & Sex in Nineteenth Century American Novels (not
offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 241 Latinx Voices in the Age of Trump
ENTS 210 Environmental Justice
ENTS 307 Wilderness Field Studies: Grand Canyon (not offered in 2022‐23)
GWSS 150 Working Sex: Commercial Sexual Cultures (not offered in 2022‐23)
GWSS 212 Foundations of LGBTQ Studies
GWSS 250 Politics of Reproductive Justice
GWSS 265 Black Feminist Thought (not offered in 2022‐23)
GWSS 289 Pleasure, Intimacy, Violence (not offered in 2022‐23)
GWSS 334 Feminist Theory (not offered in 2022‐23)
GWSS 398 Capstone: Transnational Feminist Activism (not offered in 2022‐23)
GWSS 398 Capstone: Schooling Sex: History of Sex Education & Instruction (not offered in
2022‐23)
HIST 116 Intro to Indigenous Histories, 1887‐present (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 123 U.S. Women's History Since 1877 (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 125 African American History I: From Africa to the Civil War
HIST 126 African American History II
HIST 127 The Roaring Twenties & the Rough Thirties in U.S. History (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 205 American Environmental History
HIST 212 The Era of the American Revolution
HIST 213 Politics and Protest in the New Nation
HIST 214 Sport and the Color Line (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 220 From Blackface to Blaxploitation: Black History and/in Film
HIST 226 U.S. Consumer Culture
HIST 228 Civil Rights and Black Power
HIST 229 Working with Gender in U.S. History
HIST 230 Black Americans and the U.S. Civil War and Reconstruction
HIST 275 Latin American Immigration to the US
HIST 301 Indigenous Histories at Carleton (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 306 American Wilderness (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 308 American Cities and Nature
MUSC 126 America's Music
MUSC 247 1950s/60s American Folk Music Revival
MUSC 337 Music in Social Movements (not offered in 2022‐23)
PHIL 228 Freedom and Alienation in Black American Philosophy (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 122 Politics in America: Liberty and Equality
POSC 202 Tools of National Power: Statecraft and Diplomatic Power (not offered in 2022‐
23)
POSC 204 How American Campaigns and Elections Work (and Don’t Work)
POSC 209 Money and Politics (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 210 Misinformation, Political Rumors, and Conspiracy Theories
POSC 213 Psychology of Mass Political Behavior (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 216 Politics in the Post‐Truth Society (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 218 Schools, Scholarship and Policy in the United States (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 220 Politics and Political History in Film (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 231 American Foreign Policy (not offered in 2022‐23)

35
o



POSC 240 At the Corner of Broadway and Main Street: The Contrasting Politics of Northfield
and the Twin Cities
o POSC 266 Urban Political Economy (not offered in 2022‐23)
o POSC 269 I Did My Own Research: Information and Political Division in America (not offered
in 2022‐23)
o POSC 271 Constitutional Law I
o POSC 272 Constitutional Law II
o POSC 273 Race and Politics in the U.S.
o POSC 275 Black Radical Political Thought, 1919‐1969 (not offered in 2022‐23)
o POSC 302 Subordinated Politics and Intergroup Relations*
o POSC 306 Identity Politics and Group Behavior in America*
o POSC 315 Polarization, Parties, and Power* (not offered in 2022‐23)
o POSC 339 LGBTQ Politics in America (not offered in 2022‐23)
o RELG 130 Native American Religions
o RELG 140 Religion and American Culture (not offered in 2022‐23)
o RELG 219 Religious Law, Il/Legal Religions (not offered in 2022‐23)
o SOAN 114 Modern Families: An Introduction to the Sociology of the Family (not offered in
2022‐23)
o SOAN 206 Critical Perspectives on Work in the Twenty‐first Century (not offered in 2022‐
23)
o SOAN 225 Social Movements (not offered in 2022‐23)
o SOAN 252 Growing up in an Aging Society
o SOAN 263 Terrorism (not offered in 2022‐23)
o SOAN 272 Sociological Perspectives on Race and Ethnicity in the United States (not offered
in 2022‐23)
o SOAN 288 Diversity, Democracy, Inequality in America (not offered in 2022‐23)
o SOAN 310 Sociology of Mass Incarceration
o SOAN 314 Contemporary Issues in Critical Criminology (not offered in 2022‐23)
o THEA 227 Theatre for Social Change
Space and Place: How is space organized, and how do people make place? This includes the study
of natural and built environments; local, regional, national and transnational communities; and
international and inter‐regional flows of people, goods, and ideas.
o AMST 100 Walt Whitman's New York City
o AMST 204 What’s Race Got To Do With It?: Constructing Communities that Discard Lives
(not offered in 2022‐23)
o AMST 214 Music in the 1970s (not offered in 2022‐23)
o AMST 230 The American Sublime: Landscape, Character & National Destiny in Nineteenth
Century America (not offered in 2022‐23)
o AMST 240 The Midwest and the American Imagination (not offered in 2022‐23)
o AMST 248 Confine and Detain: The Carceral State in America
o AMST 256 Walt Whitman's New York (not offered in 2022‐23)
o AMST 267 Utopia, Dystopia, and Myopia: Suburbia in Fiction and Scholarship (not offered in
2022‐23)
o AMST 287 California Program: California Art and Visual Culture
o AMST 325 Labor and Identity in America (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ARTH 171 History of Photography
o ARTH 240 Art Since 1945
o ARTH 247 Architecture Since 1950 (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ARTH 265 European Architectural Studies Program: Urban Planning in Europe (not offered
in 2022‐23)

36
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o

ARTH 341 Art and Democracy (not offered in 2022‐23)
CAMS 225 Film Noir: The Dark Side of the American Dream
CGSC 386 Adolescent Cognitive Development: Developing an Identity and Life Plans (not
offered in 2022‐23)
ECON 271 Economics of Natural Resources and the Environment
EDUC 338 Multicultural Education
EDUC 344 Teenage Wasteland: Adolescence and the American High School (not offered in
2022‐23)
ENGL 212 Nineteenth‐Century American Literature (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 221 "Moby‐Dick" & Race: Whiteness and the Whale (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 227 Imagining the Borderlands
ENGL 234 Literature of the American South (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 236 American Nature Writing (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 247 The American West (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 248 Visions of California (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 253 Food Writing: History, Culture, Practice
ENGL 288 California Program: The Literature of California
ENGL 329 The City in American Literature
ENGL 332 Faulkner, Hemingway, and Fitzgerald (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 352 Toni Morrison: Novelist (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENTS 210 Environmental Justice
ENTS 307 Wilderness Field Studies: Grand Canyon (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 126 African American History II
HIST 203 American Indian Education (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 205 American Environmental History
HIST 228 Civil Rights and Black Power
HIST 229 Working with Gender in U.S. History
HIST 301 Indigenous Histories at Carleton (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 306 American Wilderness (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 308 American Cities and Nature
HIST 316 Presenting America's Founding (not offered in 2022‐23)
MUSC 115 Listening to the Movies
MUSC 247 1950s/60s American Folk Music Revival
POSC 218 Schools, Scholarship and Policy in the United States (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 240 At the Corner of Broadway and Main Street: The Contrasting Politics of Northfield
and the Twin Cities
POSC 273 Race and Politics in the U.S.
POSC 302 Subordinated Politics and Intergroup Relations*
RELG 100 American Pilgrimages
RELG 130 Native American Religions
RELG 239 Religion & American Landscape (not offered in 2022‐23)
SOAN 114 Modern Families: An Introduction to the Sociology of the Family (not offered in
2022‐23)
SOAN 151 Global Minnesota: An Anthropology of Our State (not offered in 2022‐23)
SOAN 206 Critical Perspectives on Work in the Twenty‐first Century (not offered in 2022‐
23)
SOAN 252 Growing up in an Aging Society
SOAN 272 Sociological Perspectives on Race and Ethnicity in the United States (not offered
in 2022‐23)
SOAN 278 Urban Ethnography and the American Experience

37


o SOAN 310 Sociology of Mass Incarceration
Production and Consumption of Culture: How do people represent their experiences and ideas as
culture? How is culture transmitted, appropriated and consumed? Students will examine the role of
artists and the expressive arts, including literature, visual arts and performance as well as that of
consumers and producers.
o AMST 100 Walt Whitman's New York City
o AMST 204 What’s Race Got To Do With It?: Constructing Communities that Discard Lives
(not offered in 2022‐23)
o AMST 214 Music in the 1970s (not offered in 2022‐23)
o AMST 225 Beauty and Race in America (not offered in 2022‐23)
o AMST 230 The American Sublime: Landscape, Character & National Destiny in Nineteenth
Century America (not offered in 2022‐23)
o AMST 240 The Midwest and the American Imagination (not offered in 2022‐23)
o AMST 254 The 1930s: Social and Cultural Impact of the Great Depression (not offered in
2022‐23)
o AMST 256 Walt Whitman's New York (not offered in 2022‐23)
o AMST 269 Woodstock Nation (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ARTH 171 History of Photography
o ARTH 240 Art Since 1945
o ARTH 247 Architecture Since 1950 (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ARTH 341 Art and Democracy (not offered in 2022‐23)
o CAMS 187 Cult Television and Fan Cultures (not offered in 2022‐23)
o CAMS 215 American Television History (not offered in 2022‐23)
o CAMS 216 American Cinema of the 1970s (not offered in 2022‐23)
o CAMS 225 Film Noir: The Dark Side of the American Dream
o CAMS 258 Feminist and Queer Media
o CAMS 270 Nonfiction
o CAMS 340 Television Studies Seminar
o CGSC 386 Adolescent Cognitive Development: Developing an Identity and Life Plans (not
offered in 2022‐23)
o DANC 266 Reading The Dancing Body (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ECON 262 The Economics of Sports
o EDUC 344 Teenage Wasteland: Adolescence and the American High School (not offered in
2022‐23)
o ENGL 113 Horror Fiction (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 117 African American Literature (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 119 Introduction to U.S. Latino/a Literature (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 120 American Short Stories (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 212 Nineteenth‐Century American Literature (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 215 Modern American Literature (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 221 "Moby‐Dick" & Race: Whiteness and the Whale (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 227 Imagining the Borderlands
o ENGL 230 Studies in African American Literature: From the 1950s to the Present
o ENGL 233 Writing and Social Justice (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 234 Literature of the American South (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 235 Asian American Literature
o ENGL 236 American Nature Writing (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 239 Democracy: Politics, Race, & Sex in Nineteenth Century American Novels (not
offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 241 Latinx Voices in the Age of Trump

38
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o



ENGL 247 The American West (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 248 Visions of California (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 253 Food Writing: History, Culture, Practice
ENGL 258 Playwrights of Color: Taking the Stage
ENGL 332 Faulkner, Hemingway, and Fitzgerald (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 352 Toni Morrison: Novelist (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 366 The Carleton Miscellany (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENTS 307 Wilderness Field Studies: Grand Canyon (not offered in 2022‐23)
GWSS 150 Working Sex: Commercial Sexual Cultures (not offered in 2022‐23)
GWSS 398 Capstone: Race, Gender, and Sexuality in Popular Culture
GWSS 398 Capstone: Schooling Sex: History of Sex Education & Instruction (not offered in
2022‐23)
o HIST 122 U.S. Women's History to 1877 (not offered in 2022‐23)
o HIST 127 The Roaring Twenties & the Rough Thirties in U.S. History (not offered in 2022‐23)
o HIST 211 Revolts and Resistance in Early America (not offered in 2022‐23)
o HIST 220 From Blackface to Blaxploitation: Black History and/in Film
o HIST 225 James Baldwin and Black Lives Matter (not offered in 2022‐23)
o HIST 226 U.S. Consumer Culture
o HIST 229 Working with Gender in U.S. History
o HIST 306 American Wilderness (not offered in 2022‐23)
o HIST 308 American Cities and Nature
o HIST 316 Presenting America's Founding (not offered in 2022‐23)
o HIST 320 The Progressive Era?
o MUSC 115 Listening to the Movies
o MUSC 126 America's Music
o MUSC 130 The History of Jazz (not offered in 2022‐23)
o MUSC 131 The Blues From the Delta to Chicago (not offered in 2022‐23)
o MUSC 136 History of Rock
o MUSC 232 Golden Age of R & B (not offered in 2022‐23)
o MUSC 246 Music in Racism and Antiracism
o MUSC 247 1950s/60s American Folk Music Revival
o MUSC 341 Rock Lab and Lab (not offered in 2022‐23)
o PHIL 228 Freedom and Alienation in Black American Philosophy (not offered in 2022‐23)
o POSC 204 How American Campaigns and Elections Work (and Don’t Work)
o POSC 216 Politics in the Post‐Truth Society (not offered in 2022‐23)
o POSC 220 Politics and Political History in Film (not offered in 2022‐23)
o POSC 355 Identity, Culture and Rights* (not offered in 2022‐23)
o PSYC 384 Psychology of Prejudice
o RELG 140 Religion and American Culture (not offered in 2022‐23)
o RELG 232 Queer Religions (not offered in 2022‐23)
o RELG 249 Religion and American Public Life (not offered in 2022‐23)
o RELG 285 Islam in America: Race, Religion and Politics (not offered in 2022‐23)
o RELG 344 Lived Religion in America
o SOAN 114 Modern Families: An Introduction to the Sociology of the Family (not offered in
2022‐23)
o SOAN 252 Growing up in an Aging Society
o THEA 227 Theatre for Social Change
America in the World (Migration, Borderlands, and Empire) How is the society and culture of the
United States shaped by the historical and contemporary flows of people, goods and ideas from

39
around the world? In turn, students will also focus on the various ways in which both colonial
America and the United States have shaped the world.
o AMST 225 Beauty and Race in America (not offered in 2022‐23)
o AMST 240 The Midwest and the American Imagination (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ARTH 240 Art Since 1945
o ECON 262 The Economics of Sports
o ECON 264 Health Care Economics
o ECON 271 Economics of Natural Resources and the Environment
o EDUC 330 Refugee and Immigrant Experiences in Faribault, MN (not offered in 2022‐23)
o EDUC 340 Race, Immigration, and Schools
o ENGL 119 Introduction to U.S. Latino/a Literature (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 221 "Moby‐Dick" & Race: Whiteness and the Whale (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 235 Asian American Literature
o ENGL 252 Caribbean Fiction (not offered in 2022‐23)
o GWSS 150 Working Sex: Commercial Sexual Cultures (not offered in 2022‐23)
o GWSS 398 Capstone: Transnational Feminist Activism (not offered in 2022‐23)
o HIST 211 Revolts and Resistance in Early America (not offered in 2022‐23)
o HIST 213 Politics and Protest in the New Nation
o HIST 275 Latin American Immigration to the US
o POSC 122 Politics in America: Liberty and Equality
o POSC 216 Politics in the Post‐Truth Society (not offered in 2022‐23)
o POSC 220 Politics and Political History in Film (not offered in 2022‐23)
o POSC 231 American Foreign Policy (not offered in 2022‐23)
o POSC 269 I Did My Own Research: Information and Political Division in America (not offered
in 2022‐23)
o POSC 271 Constitutional Law I
o POSC 274 Globalization, Pandemics, and Human Security (not offered in 2022‐23)
o POSC 280 COVID‐19 and Globalization (not offered in 2022‐23)
o POSC 355 Identity, Culture and Rights* (not offered in 2022‐23)
o RELG 243 Native American Religious Freedom
o RELG 249 Religion and American Public Life (not offered in 2022‐23)
o RELG 285 Islam in America: Race, Religion and Politics (not offered in 2022‐23)
o RELG 289 Global Religions in Minnesota (not offered in 2022‐23)
o SOAN 151 Global Minnesota: An Anthropology of Our State (not offered in 2022‐23)
o SOAN 170 Investigating (In)Equality: Comparative Welfare States (not offered in 2022‐23)
o SOAN 263 Terrorism (not offered in 2022‐23)

American Studies Courses
AMST 100 Walt Whitman's New York City "O City / Behold me! Incarnate me as I have incarnated you!" An
investigation of the burgeoning metropolitan city where the young Walter Whitman became a poet in the
1850s. Combining historical inquiry into the lives of nineteenth‐century citizens of Brooklyn and Manhattan
with analysis of Whitman’s varied journalistic writings and utterly original poetry, we will reconstruct how
Whitman found his muse and his distinctively modern subject in the geography, demographics, markets,
politics, and erotics of New York. 6 credits; AI, WR1, IDS; Fall; Peter J Balaam

40
AMST 115 Introduction to American Studies This overview of the "interdisciplinary discipline" of American
Studies will focus on the ways American Studies engages with and departs from other scholarly fields of
inquiry. We will study the stories of those who have been marginalized in the social, political, cultural, and
economic life of the United States due to their class, race, ethnicity, gender, sexual orientation, religion,
citizenship, and level of ability. We will explore contemporary American Studies concerns like racial and
class formation, the production of space and place, the consumption and circulation of culture, and
transnational histories. 6 credits; HI, IDS, WR2; Winter, Spring; Christopher M Elias
AMST 130 Latinx Social Movements: From Bandits to the Young Lords In this class, we will discuss Latinx
social and political movements across America, from post‐1848 to the twentieth century. We will work to
understand both their historical and historiographical impact: What conditions were these movements
responding to? What emerged from their actions? And how are these movements talked about and
remembered now? We will also track state responses to these movements, including the creation of law
enforcement agencies in the Southwest and national counterintelligence programs. 6 credits; HI, IDS; Not
offered 2022‐23
AMST 204 What’s Race Got To Do With It?: Constructing Communities that Discard Lives In this course
students will engage race and other forms of identity (including class and disability) using both social
scientific and humanistic approaches to examine how the process of building place in the U.S. has
historically meant discarding lives, excluding communities, and maintaining caste. Subtopics include: Art's
impact on gentrification, POC suburbanization, Disposable lives in America, Apartheid from architectural
design, and Comparative memoir. 6 credits; SI, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
AMST 214 Music in the 1970s The 1970s were a period of extraordinary musical creativity and change. The
era saw the flowering of jazz fusion, funk, heavy metal, and punk, debates over authenticity in country
music; experimentation with minimalism and technology in classical music; the beginnings of a "world
music" market as salsa, Afro‐pop, and reggae made inroads; and the increased importance of such
technology as cassette tapes, fm radio, video games, VCRs and the Sony Walkman. We'll explore this
decade of music through listening, footage, historic documents, and scholarship from a variety of
disciplines, focusing on stylistic innovations, critical and audience reception, and cultural values. 6 credits;
SI, WR2, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
AMST 225 Beauty and Race in America In this class we consider the construction of American beauty
historically, examining the way whiteness intersects with beauty to produce a dominant model that
marginalizes women of color. We study how communities of color follow, refuse, or revise these beauty
ideals through literature. We explore events like the beauty pageant, material culture such as cosmetics,
places like the beauty salon, and body work like cosmetic surgery to understand how beauty is produced
and negotiated. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
AMST 230 The American Sublime: Landscape, Character & National Destiny in Nineteenth Century America
Focusing on the early nineteenth century struggle to create an American nation and a national culture, we
will look at the ways Americans adopted and adapted European ideas, particularly the aesthetic idea of the
Sublime, in their attempt to come to terms with the conquest of the new land and its native inhabitants
and with the nature of their national enterprise. Writers Irving, Cooper, Emerson, Thoreau, Hawthorne,
Melville, Whitman, and Dickinson and painters Cole, Bierstadt, Church, Kensett, and Lane will be included.
Major themes will include attitudes towards landscape and settlement, a distinctively American character,
the nature and utility of art, and ideas of American empire. 6 credits; LA, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23

41
AMST 231 Contemporary Indigenous Activism Indigenous peoples across Turtle Island and the Pacific
Islands are fighting to revitalize Indigenous languages, uphold tribal sovereignty, and combat violence
against Indigenous women, among many other struggles. This course shines a light on contemporary
Indigenous activism and investigates social justice through the lens of Indian Country, asking questions like:
What tools are movements using to promote Indigenous resurgence? And what are the educational,
gendered, environmental, linguistic, and religious struggles to which these movements respond? Students
will acquire an understanding of contemporary Indigenous movements, the issues they address, and the
responsibilities of non‐Native people living on Indigenous lands. 6 credits; HI, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
AMST 240 The Midwest and the American Imagination The history of American culture has always been
shaped by a dialectic between the local and the universal, the regional and the national. The particular
geography and history of the Midwest (the prairie, the plains, the old Northwest, Native Americans and
white adventurers, settlers and immigrants) have shaped its livelihoods, its identities, its meanings.
Focusing on the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, this course will explore literature, art
history, and the social and cultural history of the Midwest. 6 credits; HI, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
AMST 244 Approaches to Indigenous Studies Indigenous Studies is both a body of content knowledge and a
research methodology. This course provides an overview of the history of exploitative research dynamics
between universities and Indigenous peoples while exposing students to alternative methodologies that
center Indigenous perspectives and research priorities. Students will discuss what it means to be an ethical
research partner as they learn about decolonizing and Indigenous research strategies. This course brings
together ideas from history, anthropology, law, public health, education, literature, art, and social work to
evaluate studies relating to Indigenous peoples for their methods, contributions, and ethics. 6 credits; HI,
IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
AMST 248 Confine and Detain: The Carceral State in America What function do prisons and immigrant
detention centers serve? How do they figure in American history and society, especially since their current
forms are relatively new? In this class, we will examine state‐sponsored confinement and detention
practices from seventeenth to twenty‐first century America. Across three units, we will analyze abduction
and captivity, forced labor and relocation, and internment and border security as carceral practices. We will
pay particular attention to race, class, gender, sexuality, and disability to understand how confinement and
detention have shaped American state‐building. 6 credits; HI, IDS; Fall; Christine E Castro
AMST 254 The 1930s: Social and Cultural Impact of the Great Depression Through cultural manifestations‐‐
literature, painting, movies, radio, historic preservation, and music‐‐we will trace progress from shock and
despair to hope in the ‘30s and see how Americans of all races and classes coped with the disruptions and
opportunities of economic cataclysm, political shifts, new social programs and expectations, and
technology. Materials will include texts on the New Deal, labor, the Great Migration and race relations;
fiction, essays, and plays by Steinbeck, Nathaniel West, James Agee, Thornton Wilder, Meridel LeSueur,
Hurston, and Wright; popular movies and music; and photography, painting, Art Deco, and the 1939
World’s Fair. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
AMST 256 Walt Whitman's New York An interdisciplinary investigation of the burgeoning,
brash, alluring Other that the young Walter Whitman found in New York in the 1850s. Considering "Leaves
of Grass," as well as his journalistic, "self‐help," and political writings, we will reconstruct how Whitman
found his muse, his voice, and his distinctively modern and democratic subject in the geography,
demographics, markets, politics, and erotics of New York: "O City / Behold me! Incarnate me as I have
incarnated you! I have rejected nothing you have offered me!‐‐whom you adopted, I have adopted; good or
bad..." 6 credits; HI, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23

42
AMST 267 Utopia, Dystopia, and Myopia: Suburbia in Fiction and Scholarship This course peers through the
picture window of suburban life in the United States. Our primary text will be film. To what extent do
fictional accounts reflect the scholarly concerns and analytical conclusions of historians and social
scientists? What themes are common in film and/or literature but get little attention from scholars?
Students will be obligated to view films on their own if designated show times are inconvenient. Some films
may be R‐rated. Prerequisite: American Studies 115 or sophomore standing. 6 credits; SI, IDS; Not offered
2022‐23
AMST 269 Woodstock Nation "If you remember the Sixties, you weren't there." We will test the truth of
that popular adage by exploring the American youth counterculture of the 1960s, particularly the turbulent
period of the late sixties. Using examples from literature, music, and film, we will examine the hope and
idealism, the violence, confusion, wacky creativity, and social mores of this seminal decade in American
culture. Topics explored will include the Beat Generation, the Vietnam War, Civil Rights, LSD, and the rise of
environmentalism, feminism, and Black Power. 6 credits; LA, WR2, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
AMST 287 California Program: California Art and Visual Culture An in‐depth exploration of the dynamic
relationship between the arts and popular conceptions of California: whether as bountiful utopia, suburban
paradise or multicultural frontier. We will meet with California artists and art historians, and visit museums
and galleries. Art and artists studied will range from Native American art, the Arts and Crafts movement
and California Impressionism to the photography of Ansel Adams, urban murals and the imagery of
commercial culture (such as promotional brochures and orange‐crate labels). Prerequisite: Participation in
AMST OCS program. 6 credits; LA; Winter; Cathy A Kowalewski
AMST 289 California Program: California Field Studies Students will participate in a number of fieldtrips
dealing with California's history, literature, and environment. Sites visited will include Sutter's Fort, Pt.
Reyes, the Modoc Lava Beds, El Teatro Campesino, Hearst Castle, Silicon Valley, Joshua Tree, Watts Towers,
the Rose Bowl and Yosemite National Park. Students will also complete an Oral Culture Project.
Prerequisite: Participation in AMST OCS program. 4 credits; S/CR/NC; NE; Winter; Michael J Kowalewski
AMST 290 California Program: Directed Reading Students will do some preparatory reading on California
history, literature and art before the seminar begins and additional reading connected with field trips and
guest speakers. 2 credits; S/CR/NC; NE; Winter; Michael J Kowalewski
AMST 325 Labor and Identity in America How have social categories (i.e., race, class, gender, sexuality)
been constructed according to labor? How have people lived their identities through their labor? This
course will focus on manual labor, with special attention to agricultural work, and will span from the
Antebellum South to the present. We will examine how manual labor has functioned as a symbol of
belonging in the nation. Throughout the course, we will emphasize lived experience‐‐or, how people
responded to cultural shifts, and made social or political change through their work‐‐using oral histories,
community archives, cultural productions and social customs in the workplace. 6 credits; HI, IDS; Not
offered 2022‐23
AMST 345 Theory and Practice of American Studies Introduction to some of the animating debates within
American Studies from the 1930s to the present. We will study select themes, theories, and methodologies
in the writings of a number of scholars and try to understand 1) the often highly contested nature of
debates about how best to study American culture; and 2) how various theories and forms of analysis in
American Studies have evolved and transformed themselves over the last seventy years. Not designed to be
a fine‐grained institutional history of American Studies, but a vigorous exploration of some of the central

43
questions of interpretation in the field. Normally taken by majors in their junior year. Prerequisite:
American Studies 115, 287 or instructor permission. 6 credits; NE, IDS; Winter; Christine E Castro
AMST 396 Commodifying and Policing: Globalization of the American Suburb and City How does the
American export of suburban living, gated communities, and broken‐windows policing reshape place,
identity and the socio‐economic hierarchy? We will also investigate how the commodification of the arts
and the neoliberalization of education contribute to gentrification and other forms of spatial cleansing and
rebranding. Required for juniors in the American Studies major. Prerequisite: American Studies 115, 287 or
instructor permission. 6 credits; WR2, IDS, SI; Not offered 2022‐23
AMST 396 Producing Latinidad As Arlene Dávila points out in Latinos Inc, Latinidad—the term that names a
set of presumably common attributes that connects Latinxs in the U.S.—emerges in part from communities
but, importantly, is developed heavily by the media, advertising, and other political and social institutions,
including academia. In this course we consider how ideas and imaginings of who Latinxs are and what
Latinidad is develop within political spaces (the electorate, the census), in local places, and through various
media, including television, advertising, and music. We will consider how individual writers and artists
contribute to the conversation. Throughout, we will engage with social and cultural theories about racial
formation, gender, and sexuality. Prerequisite: American Studies 115 or instructor consent. 6 credits; HI,
WR2, IDS; Spring; Adriana Estill
AMST 398 Advanced Research in American Studies This seminar introduces advanced skills in American
Studies research, focusing on the shaping and proposing of a major research project. Through a
combination of class discussion, small group work and presentations, and one‐on‐one interactions with the
professor, majors learn the process of imaging, creating, and preparing independent interdisciplinary
projects as well as the interconnections of disparate scholarly and creative works. Prerequisite: American
Studies 345. 3 credits; S/CR/NC; NE; Fall; Adriana Estill
AMST 399 Senior Seminar in American Studies This seminar focuses on advanced skills in American Studies
research, critical reading, writing, and presentation. Engagement with one scholarly talk, keyed to the
current year's comps exam theme, will be part of the course. Through a combination of class discussion,
small group work and presentations, and one‐on‐one interactions with the professor, majors learn the
process of crafting and supporting independent interdisciplinary arguments, no matter which option for
comps they are pursuing. Students also will learn effective strategies for peer review and oral presentation.
Prerequisite: American Studies 345. 3 credits; NE; Fall, Winter; Adriana Estill
AMST 400 Integrative Exercise: Exam and Essay Exam: Students read selected works and view films in the
field of American Studies and in a special topic area designated by the program. For integrative exercise
examination students only. Essay: Seniors working on approved essays or projects in American Studies with
the support of their advisers, will work independently to complete their theses, performances or projects to
satisfy the college "comps" requirement. Students will be required to give a public presentation on their
papers or projects during the spring term. Prerequisite: American Studies 396. 3 credits; S/NC; Fall, Winter;
Adriana Estill

Arabic
See Middle Eastern Languages.

Archaeology Minor

44

Archaeology is the interdisciplinary study of the past through its material remains, situated in their
cultural and environmental context. The core and supporting courses of the Archaeology Minor at
Carleton are designed to give students a methodological and theoretical introduction to these three
elements of materials, culture and environment. In course projects, students take an interdisciplinary
view, analyzing and interpreting material remains in a variety of ways. The range of supporting
courses provides students with the flexibility to plan their own programs. In addition to
Archaeology courses, several other departments offer classes that count toward the Archaeology
Minor; these include Classics, Geology, Art History, History, and Sociology and Anthropology.
Students are highly encouraged (but not required) to become involved in archaeological fieldwork
beyond the context of their coursework at Carleton.
Students from any major may participate in the Archaeology Minor. Students interested in the
minor are encouraged to consult with the director of the minor early in their sophomore year in
order to plan ahead and retain as much freedom of choice as possible in meeting the requirements of
the program.
Requirements for the Archaeology Minor
A total of forty-eight credits are required for the minor, including:


Core Courses (24 credits required)
o
o
o
o
o
o
o

ARCN 246 Archaeological Methods
ARCN 111 Archaeology of the Americas (not offered 2022‐23)
or CLAS 122 The Archaeology of Mediterranean Prehistory (not offered 2022‐23)
or CLAS 123 Greek Archaeology and Art (not offered 2022‐23)
or CLAS 124 Roman Archaeology and Art (not offered 2022‐23)
GEOL 210 Geomorphology
or GEOL 258 Geomorphology of Soils (not offered 2022‐23)

(Note: there is a prerequisite of one 100-level geology courses to enroll
in either of these courses)
o

SOAN 110 Introduction to Anthropology



Capstone Seminar (6 credits required):
o ARCN 395 Archaeology: Science, Ethics, Nationalism and Cultural Property (not offered
2022‐23)



Supporting Courses (18 credits required):

Supporting courses may be drawn from any of the core courses listed above (beyond the 24 credits
required), or from selected other ARCN pertinent courses (listed below). In each course the student
must (at a minimum) complete a project with an explicit focus on the interpretation of
archaeological materials. In certain circumstances another course (one not listed as ARCN
pertinent) may be substituted with the approval of the Archaeology Program director, provided the
requirement of completing an archaeological project of sufficient scale is also fulfilled. An
archaeological field school or independent study may also count toward one of the required
supporting courses with approval of the program director.

45

The director of the minor can advise students about which courses may fulfill these requirements.
These courses are in many College departments and include courses taught by visiting professors.
Students are encouraged to consult with the program director, who is available to help students and
instructors of supporting courses. The following courses with ARCN pertinent designations can be
applied to the Minor. Note that 100-level Geology courses may, but do not always, count as
supporting courses.



























ARCN 111 Archaeology of the Americas (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARCN 211 Coercion and Exploitation: Material Histories of Labor
ARCN 222 Experimental Archaeology and Experiential History
ARTH 101 Introduction to Art History I
CLAS 119 Under the Ashes of Vesuvius
CLAS 122 The Archaeology of Mediterranean Prehistory: From the Beginning to the Classical Age
(not offered in 2022‐23)
CLAS 123 Greek Archaeology and Art (not offered in 2022‐23)
CLAS 124 Roman Archaeology and Art (not offered in 2022‐23)
CLAS 145 Ancient Greek Religion
CLAS 385 Islands in Time: Insular Life, Culture, and History in the Mediterranean World (not offered
in 2022‐23)
ENTS 120 Introduction to Geospatial Analysis & Lab
GEOL 110 Introduction to Geology and Lab
GEOL 115 Climate Change in Geology and Lab (not offered in 2022‐23)
GEOL 120 Introduction to Environmental Geology & Lab (not offered in 2022‐23)
GEOL 125 Introduction to Field Geology and Lab
GEOL 210 Geomorphology and Lab
GEOL 245 “When the Earth Shook…” Earthquakes in Human History and Lab (not offered in 2022‐
23)
GEOL 258 Geology of Soils and Lab (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 133 Crisis, Creativity, and Transformation in Late Antiquity (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 138 Crusades, Mission, and the Expansion of Europe (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 201 Rome Program: Building Power and Piety in Medieval Italy, CE 300‐1150
HIST 233 The Byzantine World and Its Neighbors, 750‐ca. 1453 (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 238 The Viking World (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 246 Making Early Medieval England
HIST 338 Digital History, Public Heritage & Deep Mapping
SOAN 110 Introduction to Anthropology

Archaeology Courses
ARCN 111 Archaeology of the Americas This class will examine how archaeologists know the past, focusing
on North and South America. The course is organized by themes including migration (first peopling of the
Americas, trans‐Atlantic slave trade), early cities (Caral in South America, Teotihuacan in Central America,
Cahokia in North America), and the environment (domestication, over hunting). Remember‐‐the past is not
something natural and static that waits to be “discovered.” The past changes depending on who gets to tell
the story‐‐it is not neutral! Whose past is legitimate? Which voices get heard or ignored? In this course, you
will find out! 6 credits; SI, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
ARCN 211 Coercion and Exploitation: Material Histories of Labor What do antebellum plantations, Spanish
missions, British colonies in Australia, mining camps in Latin America, and Roman estates all have in
common? All are examples of unfair/unfree and forced labor in colonial and imperial settings. This class will

46
review archaeological, archival, and ethnographic cases of past coerced and exploitative labor, and
compare them with modern cases such as human trafficking, child slavery, bonded labor, and forced
marriage. Case studies include the Andes under Inka and Spanish rule, North American and Caribbean
plantations, British colonial Australia, and Dutch colonial Asia. 6 credits; SI, IS; Winter; Sarah A Kennedy
ARCN 222 Experimental Archaeology and Experiential History This course offers an experiential approach to
crafts, technologies, and other material practices in premodern societies. Through hands‐on activities and
collaborations with local craftspeople, farmers, and other experts, this course will examine and test a
variety of hypotheses about how people in the past lived their lives. How did prehistoric people produce
stone tools, pottery, and metal? How did ancient Greeks and Romans feed and clothe themselves? How did
medieval Europeans build their homes and bury their dead? Students will answer these questions and more
by actively participating in a range of experimental archaeology and experiential history projects. Lab
required. Prerequisite: One previous Archaeology pertinent course. 6 credits; LS; Spring; Jake N Morton
ARCN 246 Archaeological Methods & Lab As a field that is truly interdisciplinary, archaeology uses a wide
range of methods to study the past. This course provides a hands‐on introduction to the entire
archaeological process through classroom, field, and laboratory components. Students will participate in
background research concerning local places of historical or archaeological interest; landscape surveying
and mapping in GIS; excavation; the recording, analysis, and interpretation of artifacts; and the publication
of results. This course involves real archaeological fieldwork, and students will have an opportunity to
contribute to the history of the local community while learning archaeological methods applicable all over
the world. 6 credits; LS, QRE; Fall; Sarah A Kennedy
ARCN 395 Archaeology: Science, Ethics, Nationalism and Cultural Property This seminar course will focus on
a wide range of contemporary issues in archaeology, including case studies from many continents and time
periods that shed light on archaeological theory and practice. Specific course content varies. The course
serves as the capstone seminar for the Archaeology Minor; enrollment is also open to non‐minors. 6
credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐23

Art & Art History
Carleton combines in a single department the creative aspects of art making and the study of art as
an historical discipline. The Studio Art program helps students develop their skills in a variety of
arts media. It also gives them a critical understanding of the functions and processes of art that fits
well with the goals of the college's liberal arts orientation. The Art History program introduces
students to the intrinsic qualities of artistic images and artifacts. Equally important, it considers the
conditions of their production and viewing, their functions and meanings, and the roles they play in
recording and shaping people, perceptions, events, and cultures.
Both programs serve potential majors, including students who go on to art-related careers, as well as
students who take courses as part of their broad liberal arts education. The Art History program also
offers the possibility to minor in the discipline.
Requirements for the Art History Major
Art History: 72 credits including:


the seminar for art history majors (ARTH 298)

47




the integrative exercise (ARTH 400)
two six‐credit Studio Art courses
48 elective credits in Art History, including

o

o

o

o

at least six credits in non‐Western art history
 ARTH 140 African Art and Culture
 ARTH 155 Islamic Art and Architecture
 ARTH 165 Japanese Art and Culture (not offered in 2022‐23)
 ARTH 166 Chinese Art and Culture
 ARTH 209 Chinese Painting (not offered in 2022‐23)
 ARTH 220 The Origins of Manga: Japanese Prints
 ARTH 266 Arts of the Japanese Tea Ceremony (not offered in 2022‐23)
 ARTH 267 Gardens in China and Japan
 ARTH 321 Arts of the Chinese Scholar's Studio (not offered in 2022‐23)
at least six credits in art history of the western tradition before 1800
 ARTH 172 Modern Art: 1890‐1945 (not offered in 2022‐23)
 ARTH 232 Madrid Program: Spanish Art Live
 ARTH 235 Revival, Revelation, and Re‐animation: The Art of Europe's "Renaissance"
(not offered in 2022‐23)
 ARTH 236 Baroque Art (not offered in 2022‐23)
 ARTH 255 Islam in the Eyes of the West (not offered in 2022‐23)
 ARTH 263 European Architectural Studies Program: Prehistory to Postmodernism
(not offered in 2022‐23)
 ARTH 324 The Sexuality of Jesus Christ
 CLAS 123 Greek Archaeology and Art (not offered in 2022‐23)
at least six credits in art history of the western tradition after 1800
 ARTH 100 Art and Culture in the Gilded Age
 ARTH 160 American Art to 1940 (not offered in 2022‐23)
 ARTH 171 History of Photography
 ARTH 172 Modern Art: 1890‐1945 (not offered in 2022‐23)
 ARTH 240 Art Since 1945
 ARTH 241 Contemporary Art for Artists
 ARTH 247 Architecture Since 1950 (not offered in 2022‐23)
 ARTH 265 European Architectural Studies Program: Urban Planning in Europe (not
offered in 2022‐23)
 ARTH 266 Arts of the Japanese Tea Ceremony (not offered in 2022‐23)
 ARTH 327 A History of Campus Planning (not offered in 2022‐23)
at least one 300‐level seminar.

Art History majors are encouraged to take advantage of off-campus study programs. No more than
two art history courses taken outside of the department can be counted toward the major.
Occasionally one course in a related department such as Cinema and Media Studies or Classics may
count as an elective toward the major.
Requirements for the Studio Art Major
Studio Art: 78 credits including:


two six‐credit courses with a 2‐D emphasis from:
o ARTS 110 Observational Drawing

48
o
o
o
o










ARTS 113 Field Drawing
ARTS 117 Living London Program: Visualizing Renaissance England (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARTS 210 Life Drawing
ARTS 211 Topics in Art and the Environment: Drawing the Anthropocene (not offered in
2022‐23)
o ARTS 212 Studio Art Seminar in the South Pacific: Mixed‐Media Drawing
o ARTS 245 Constructed Image
o ARTS 260 Painting
o ARTS 273 Studio Art Seminar in the South Pacific: Printmaking
o ARTS 274 Printmaking – Silkscreen and Relief
o ARTS 277 Printmaking: Relief Processes (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ARTS 278 Printmaking: Intaglio Processes (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ARTS 339 Advanced Photography (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ARTS 360 Advanced Painting and Drawing
o ARTS 374 Advanced Printmaking and Book Arts (not offered in 2022‐23)
two six credits courses with a 3‐D emphasis from:
o ARTS 122 Introduction to Sculpture
o ARTS 130 Beginning Ceramics
o ARTS 151 Metalsmithing
o ARTS 222 Sculptural Practice
o ARTS 230 Ceramics: Throwing
o ARTS 232 Ceramics: Handbuilding
o ARTS 234 The Figure in Clay (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ARTS 236 Ceramics: Vessels for Tea (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ARTS 252 Metalsmithing: Ancient Techniques, New Technologies
o ARTS 322 Sculpture 2: Form and Context (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ARTS 327 Woodworking: The Table
o ARTS 330 Advanced Ceramics
Junior practicum, ARTS 298 (3 credits)
Senior practicum, ARTS 398 (3 credits)
one six‐credit 300 level studio art course
18 elective credits (3 six‐credit courses) in Studio Art
the integrative exercise (ARTS 400)
18 credits in Art History with

o

at least six of the credits in courses which concentrate in art prior to 1900 from
 ARTH 100 Witches, Monsters and Demons
 ARTH 100 Art and Culture in the Gilded Age
 ARTH 101 Introduction to Art History I
 ARTH 102 Introduction to Art History II
 ARTH 140 African Art and Culture
 ARTH 155 Islamic Art and Architecture
 ARTH 160 American Art to 1940 (not offered in 2022‐23)
 ARTH 165 Japanese Art and Culture (not offered in 2022‐23)
 ARTH 166 Chinese Art and Culture
 ARTH 171 History of Photography
 ARTH 209 Chinese Painting (not offered in 2022‐23)
 ARTH 235 Revival, Revelation, and Re‐animation: The Art of Europe's "Renaissance"
(not offered in 2022‐23)
 ARTH 236 Baroque Art (not offered in 2022‐23)

49



o
o

ARTH 255 Islam in the Eyes of the West (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARTH 263 European Architectural Studies Program: Prehistory to Postmodernism
(not offered in 2022‐23)
 ARTH 267 Gardens in China and Japan
 ARTH 323 Idolatry (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARTH 241, Contemporary Art for Artists, which is a course in contemporary art post 1945
designed for practicing artists
six elective credits.

Potential majors should enroll in Drawing or Sculpture their first year. Selected Cinema and Media
Studies production courses can count toward up to twelve elective credits (two courses) within the
major. Consult with your studio art adviser to confirm which courses apply.
Requirements for the Art History Minor
36 credits, including:



at least one 300‐level seminar
at least 30 elective credits

Minors are required to complete at least six credits in two of three art historical distribution areas:
art history of the Western tradition before 1800, art history of the Western tradition after 1800, and
non-Western art history.
Art History minors are encouraged to take advantage of off-campus study programs and to explore
visual cultural analysis in other departments such as Studio Art, Cinema and Media Studies
(CAMS) or Classics. However, no more than one art history course taken outside of the department
can be counted toward the minor.
Finally, Senior Art History minors will work closely with Junior Art History majors assisting in the
arrangements for the Art History Comps Symposium in Spring Term. This includes preparing
response questions to the senior comps presentations.
Art History Courses (ARTH)
ARTH 100 Art and Culture in the Gilded Age Staggering wealth inequality spurred by transformative
technological innovation and unbridled corporate power. Political tumult fueled by backsliding civil rights
legislation, disputed elections, and anti‐immigrant sentiment. Culture wars. American imperialism. Such
characteristics have increasingly fueled comparisons between the present day and the late‐nineteenth
century in the United States. The Gilded Age witnessed the flourishing of mass culture alongside the
founding of many elite cultural organizations—museums, symphony halls, libraries—that still stand as
preeminent civic institutions. With an occasional eye to the present, this seminar examines the art,
architecture, and cultural history of the Gilded Age. 6 credits; AI, WR1; Fall; Baird E Jarman
ARTH 100 Witches, Monsters and Demons Between 1300 and 1600 depictions of witches, monsters, and
demons moved from the margins of medieval manuscripts and the nooks of church architecture to the
center of altarpieces and heart of princely collections. Although this diabolical imagery was extremely
diverse, it came from one place: the mind of the Renaissance artist. This course examines how images that
came from within were devised and fashioned into works of art. It considers why fantastical imagery that

50
showcased the artist’s imagination was so highly valued during the Renaissance‐‐a period typically
associated with the rebirth of classical antiquity. Finally, it explores the connection between illusions,
visions, dreams, and other visual phenomena that highlighted the potential malfunction of the mind, and
artistic creation. Some of the artists discussed include, but are not limited to, Hieronymous Bosch,
Michelangelo, and Leonardo da Vinci 6 credits; AI, WR1, IS; Fall; Jessica F Keating
ARTH 101 Introduction to Art History I An introduction to the art and architecture of various geographical
areas around the world from antiquity through the "Middle Ages." The course will provide foundational
skills (tools of analysis and interpretation) as well as general, historical understanding. It will focus on a
select number of major developments in a range of media and cultures, emphasizing the way that works of
art function both as aesthetic and material objects and as cultural artifacts and forces. Issues include, for
example, sacred spaces, images of the gods, imperial portraiture, and domestic decoration. 6 credits; LA, IS;
Fall; Jessica F Keating
ARTH 102 Introduction to Art History II An introduction to the art and architecture of various geographical
areas around the world from the fifteenth century through the present. The course will provide
foundational skills (tools of analysis and interpretation) as well as general, historical understanding. It will
focus on a select number of major developments in a range of media and cultures, emphasizing the way
that works of art function both as aesthetic and material objects and as cultural artifacts and forces. Issues
include, for example, humanist and Reformation redefinitions of art in the Italian and Northern
Renaissance, realism, modernity and tradition, the tension between self‐expression and the art market, and
the use of art for political purposes. 6 credits; LA, WR2, IS; Winter; Kathleen M Ryor, Baird E Jarman
ARTH 140 African Art and Culture This course will survey the art and architecture of African peoples from
prehistory to the present. Focusing on significant case studies in various mediums (including sculpture,
painting, architecture, masquerades and body arts), this course will consider the social, cultural, aesthetic
and political contexts in which artistic practices developed both on the African continent and beyond.
Major themes will include the use of art for status production, the use of aesthetic objects in social rituals
and how the history of African and African diaspora art has been written and institutionally framed. 6
credits; LA, IS; Spring; Ross K Elfline
ARTH 155 Islamic Art and Architecture This course surveys the art and architecture of societies where
Muslims were dominant or where they formed significant minorities from the seventh through the
nineteenth centuries. It examines the form and function of architecture and works of art as well as the
social, historical and cultural contexts, patterns of use, and evolving meanings attributed to art by the
users. The course follows a chronological order, where selected visual materials are treated along chosen
themes. Themes include the creation of a distinctive visual culture in the emerging Islamic polity; cultural
interconnections along trade and pilgrimage routes; and westernization. 6 credits; LA, IS; Winter; Jessica F
Keating
ARTH 160 American Art to 1940 Concentration on painting of the colonial period (especially portraiture)
and nineteenth century (especially landscape and scenes of everyday life) with an introduction to the
modernism of the early twentieth century. The course will include analysis of the ways art shapes and
reflects cultural attitudes such as those concerning race and gender. 6 credits; LA, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
ARTH 165 Japanese Art and Culture This course will survey art and architecture in Japan from its prehistoric
beginnings until the early twentieth century, and explore the relationship between indigenous art forms
and the foreign (Korean, Chinese, European) concepts, art forms and techniques that influenced Japanese

51
culture, as well as the social political and religious contexts for artistic production. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not
offered 2022‐23
ARTH 166 Chinese Art and Culture This course will survey art and architecture in China from its prehistoric
beginnings to the end of the nineteenth century. It will examine various types of visual art forms within
their social, political and cultural contexts. Major themes that will also be explored include: the role of ritual
in the production and use of art, the relationship between the court and secular elite and art, and theories
about creativity and expression. 6 credits; LA, IS; Fall; Kathleen M Ryor
ARTH 171 History of Photography This course covers nineteenth and twentieth century photography from
its origins to the present. It will consider formal innovations in the medium, the role of photography in
society, and the place of photography in the fine arts. 6 credits; LA; Winter; Baird E Jarman
ARTH 172 Modern Art: 1890‐1945 This course explores developments in the visual arts, architecture, and
theory in Europe and America between 1890 and 1945. The major Modernist artists and movements that
sought to revolutionize vision, culture, and experience, from Symbolism to Surrealism, will be considered.
The impact of World War I, the Great Depression, and the rise of fascism will be examined as well for their
devastation of the Modernist dream of social‐cultural renewal. Lectures will be integrated with discussions
of artists' theoretical writings and group manifestoes, such as those of the Futurists, Dadaists, Surrealists,
Constructivists, and DeStijl, in addition to select secondary readings. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
ARTH 209 Chinese Painting Since the tenth century in China, a tension emerges between art created as a
means of self expression and works which were intended to display social status and political power and to
convey conventional values. This course concentrates on the primary site of this tension, the art of painting.
We will explore such issues as the influence of Confucian and Daoist philosophy on painting and calligraphy,
the changing perception of nature and the natural in art, the politics of style, and the increasing dominance
of poetry rather than narrative as a conceptual construct for painting. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
ARTH 214 Queer Art Beyond surveying the rich history of arts by LGBTQA+ individuals, this course takes as
its object of study the ways in which the arts have been used to question, undermine, and subvert the
gendered and sexual norms of dominant cultures—in short, to queer them. In so doing, such visual and
performative practices offer new, alternative models of living and acting in the world based on liberatory
politics and aesthetics. This course will consider topics such as: censorship of queer artists; art of the AIDS
crisis; activist performance; the sexual politics of public space; and queer intersections of race, class and
gender in visual art among others. Prerequisite: Any one art history course. 6 credits; LA, IDS; Not offered
2022‐23
ARTH 215 Cross‐Cultural Psychology in Prague: Czech Art and Architecture This course will examine key
developments in Czech visual art and architecture from the early medieval to the contemporary periods.
Slide‐based lectures will be supplemented by visits to representative monuments, art collections, and
museums in Prague. Prerequisite: Participation in Cross‐Cultural Psychology in Prague program. 4 credits;
S/CR/NC; LA, IS; Fall; Ken B Abrams
ARTH 220 The Origins of Manga: Japanese Prints Pictures of the floating world, or ukiyoe, were an integral
part of popular culture in Japan and functioned as illustrations, advertisements, and souvenirs. This course
will examine the development of both style and subject matter in Japanese prints within the socio‐
economic context of the seventeenth through twentieth centuries. Emphasis will be placed on the
prominent position of women and the nature of gendered activity in these prints. 6 credits; LA, IS; Winter;
Kathleen M Ryor

52
ARTH 232 Madrid Program: Spanish Art Live This course offers an introduction to Spanish art from el Greco
to the present. Classes are taught in some of the finest museums and churches of Spain, including the
Prado Museum, the Museo Nacional de Arte Reina Sofía, the Thyssen‐Bornemisza Museum, Toledo
Cathedral in Toledo, and the Church of Santo Tomé. Prerequisite: Spanish 205 and approved participation
in Madrid Program. 6 credits; LA, IS; Fall; Humberto R Huergo
ARTH 235 Revival, Revelation, and Re‐animation: The Art of Europe's "Renaissance" This course examines
European artistic production in Italy, Spain, France, Germany, and the Netherlands from the fourteenth to
the sixteenth century. The aim of the course is to introduce diverse forms of artistic production, as well as
to analyze the religious, social, and political role of art in the period. While attending to the specificities of
workshop practices, production techniques, materials, content, and form of the objects under discussion,
the course also interrogates the ways in which these objects are and, at times, are not representative of the
"Renaissance." Prerequisite: One Art History course or instructor permission. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered
2022‐23
ARTH 236 Baroque Art This course examines European artistic production in Italy, Spain, France, and the
Netherlands from the end of the sixteenth century through the seventeenth century. The aim of the course
is to interrogate how religious revolution and reformation, scientific discoveries, and political
transformations brought about a proliferation of remarkably varied types of artistic production that
permeated and altered the sacred, political, and private spheres. The class will examine in depth select
works of painting, sculpture, prints, and drawings, by Caravaggio, Bernini, Poussin, Velázquez, Rubens, and
Rembrandt, among many others. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
ARTH 240 Art Since 1945 Art from abstract expressionism to the present, with particular focus on issues
such as the modernist artist‐hero; the emergence of alternative or non‐traditional media; the influence of
the women's movement and the gay/lesbian liberation movement on contemporary art; and postmodern
theory and practice. Prerequisite: Any one term of art history. 6 credits; LA, WR2, IDS; Winter; Ross K Elfline
ARTH 241 Contemporary Art for Artists This course is a survey of major artistic movements after 1945 as
well as an introduction to significant tendencies in current art and craft production. The goal of this course
is to develop a familiarity with the important debates, discussions, and critical issues facing artists today. By
the end of the course, students will be able to relate their own work as cultural producers to these
significant contemporary artistic developments. Students will read, write about, and discuss primary
sources, artist statements, and theoretical essays covering a wide range of media with the ultimate goal of
articulating their own artistic project. Prerequisite: Any two studio art courses or permission from the
instructor. Not open to students who have previously taken Art History 240. 6 credits; LA; Spring; Ross K
Elfline
ARTH 245 Modern Architecture This course surveys the history of western architecture, chiefly in Europe
and North America, from approximately 1800 to 1950, paying particular attention to new building practices
spurred by technological innovations arising from the Industrial Revolution. Architectural theory, stylistic
concerns, new building typologies (such as skyscrapers and railway stations), urbanization, and the
professionalization of architecture receive attention in the context of different cultural and political
settings. Architectural movements covered include neoclassicism, the gothic revival, art nouveau, the
beaux‐arts tradition, the arts and crafts movement, the prairie school, constructivism, art deco,
international‐style modernism, brutalism and others. Prerequisite: One Art History course or instructor
permission. 6 credits; LA; Not offered 2022‐23

53
ARTH 247 Architecture Since 1950 This course begins by considering the international triumph of
architecture's Modern Movement as seen in key works by Mies van der Rohe, Le Corbusier and their
followers. Soon after modernism's rise, however, architects began to question the movement's tenets and
the role that architecture as a discipline plays in the fashioning of society. This course will examine the
central actors in this backlash from Britain, France, Italy, Japan, the United States and elsewhere before
exploring the architectural debates surrounding definitions of postmodernism. The course will conclude by
considering the impact of both modernism and postmodernism on contemporary architectural practice. 6
credits; LA; Not offered 2022‐23
ARTH 255 Islam in the Eyes of the West How have images of Islam impacted European culture? How did
existing pictorial traditions/practices frame the ways in which Islam was visualized in Europe? This course
will interrogate the ways in which representational technologies facilitated and/or obstructed making sense
of Islam from the twelfth to the nineteenth centuries. We will explore a wide range of images in diverse
media, including, but not limited to, maps, costume books, panel paintings, sculpture, illuminated
manuscripts, popular prints, ethnographic treatises, and early photographs. Prerequisite: Any art history
course or permission of the instructor. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
ARTH 260 Planning Utopia: Ideal Cities in Theory and Practice This course will survey the history of ideal
plans for the built urban environment. Particular attention will be given to examples from about 1850 to
the present. Projects chosen by students will greatly influence the course content, but subjects likely to
receive sustained attention include: Renaissance ideal cities, conceptions of public and private space, civic
rituals, the industrial city, Baron Haussmann’s renovations of Paris, suburbanization, the Garden City
movement, zoning legislation, Le Corbusier’s Ville Contemporaine, Frank Lloyd Wright’s Broadacre City,
New Urbanism and urban renewal, and planned capitals such as Brasília, Canberra, Chandigarh, and
Washington, D.C. Prerequisite: Any one Art History course or instructor permission. 6 credits; LA; Spring;
Baird E Jarman
ARTH 263 European Architectural Studies Program: Prehistory to Postmodernism This course surveys the
history of European architecture while emphasizing firsthand encounters with actual structures. Students
visit outstanding examples of major transnational styles‐‐including Greek, Roman, Byzantine, Moorish,
Romanesque, Gothic, Renaissance, Baroque, Neoclassical and Modernist buildings‐‐along with regionally
specific styles, such as Spanish Plateresque, English Tudor and Catalan Modernisme. Cultural and
technological changes affecting architectural practices are emphasized along with architectural theory,
ranging from Renaissance treatises to Modernist manifestos. Students also visit buildings that resist easy
classification and that raise topics such as spatial appropriation, stylistic hybridity, and political symbolism.
Prerequisite: Participation in OCS Architectural Studies Program. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
ARTH 264 European Architectural Studies Program: Managing Monuments: Issues in Cultural Heritage
Practice This course explores the theory and practice of cultural resource management by investigating
how various architectural sites and urban historic districts operate. Students will consider cultural, financial,
ethical and pedagogical aspects of contemporary tourism practices within a historical framework that roots
the travel industry alongside religious pilgrimage customs and the aristocratic tradition of the Grand Tour.
Interacting with professionals who help oversee architectural landmarks and archaeological sites, students
will analyze and assess initiatives at various locations, ranging from educational programs and preservation
plans to sustainability efforts and repatriation debates. Prerequisite: Participation in OCS Architectural
Studies Program. 3 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
ARTH 265 European Architectural Studies Program: Urban Planning in Europe This course uses metropolitan
areas visited during the program as case studies in the history and contemporary practice of urban

54
planning. Students will explore cities with the program director and with local architects and historians—as
well as in groups on their own. Specific topics include the use of major international events, such as
Olympic Games and World’s Fairs, as large‐scale planning opportunities, the development
of municipal housing programs, the reduction of automobile traffic and mass transit initiatives, the adaptive
reuse of former industrial districts, the use of cultural institutions as civic anchors, and more. Prerequisite:
Participation in OCS Architectural Studies Program. 3 credits; LA; Not offered 2022‐23
ARTH 266 Arts of the Japanese Tea Ceremony This course will examine the history and aesthetics of the tea
ceremony in Japan (chanoyu). It will focus on the types of objects produced for use in the Japanese tea
ceremony from the fifteenth century through the present. Themes to be explored include: the relationship
of social status and politics to the development of chanoyu; the religious dimensions of the tea ceremony;
gender roles of tea practitioners; nationalist appropriation of the tea ceremony and its relationship to the
mingei movement in the twentieth century; and the international promotion of the Japanese tea ceremony
post‐WWII. Prerequisite: Requires concurrent registration in Studio Arts 236. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered
2022‐23
ARTH 267 Gardens in China and Japan A garden is usually defined as a piece of land that is cultivated or
manipulated in some way by man for one or more purposes. Gardens often take the form of an
aestheticized space that miniaturizes the natural landscape. This course will explore the historical
phenomenon of garden building in China and Japan with a special emphasis on how cultural and religious
attitudes towards nature contribute to the development of gardens in urban and suburban environments.
In addition to studying historical source material, students will be required to apply their knowledge by
building both virtual and physical re‐creations of gardens. 6 credits; ARP, IS; Spring; Kathleen M Ryor
ARTH 288 Curatorial Seminar Through a discussion‐based format, this course explores the nature of
museums, the roles of contemporary curators, and the evolving functions of exhibitions. Theoretical
investigations are complemented by practical, hands‐on experiences. Working directly with artworks from
the Carleton Art Collection, the group will prepare and execute an exhibition to be shown in the Perlman
Teaching Museum. Students will conduct artist‐specific research, draft interpretive text, formulate
exhibition labels, and consider various exhibition formats. In the Fall 2018 seminar, students will create an
exhibition that explores the roles text, symbols, and writing play when they are incorporated into visual art.
Prerequisite: Any one Art History course or instructor permission. 6 credits; LA; Not offered 2022‐23
ARTH 298 Seminar for Art History Majors An intensive study of the nature of art history as an intellectual
discipline and of the approaches scholars have taken to various art historical problems. Attention as well to
principles of current art historical research and writing. Recommended for juniors who have declared art
history as a major. 6 credits; LA; Spring; Jessica F Keating
ARTH 321 Arts of the Chinese Scholar's Studio During the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries in China,
unprecedented economic development and urbanization expanded the number of educated elite who used
their wealth to both display their status and distinguish themselves as cultural leaders. As a result, this
period experienced a boom in estate and garden building, art collecting and luxury consumption. This
course will examine a wide range of objects from painting and calligraphy to furniture and ceramics within
the context of domestic architecture of the late Ming dynasty. It will also examine the role of taste and
social class in determining the style of art and architecture. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
ARTH 323 Idolatry Idolatry is an issue that has often determined how human beings interact with and
conceive of the world around them. Focusing on the Judeo‐Christian formulations of idolatry this course
draws on a range of media, from the Hebrew Bible to the bones of saints and popular prints, as we analyze

55
verbal and visual representations of the sacred and the profane. The driving questions will be: how have
idols and idolaters been recognized in the past, and how have these various textual and visual formulations
of idolatry shaped works of art from the ancient, medieval, and early modern worlds? Prerequisite: 200
level Art History course or instructor permission. 6 credits; LA, WR2, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
ARTH 324 The Sexuality of Jesus Christ Why did Renaissance artists produce hundreds of paintings of the
Christ Child touching his genitals or presenting his genitals to someone, for instance his mother the Virgin
Mary, inside the picture? Why did images of the dead Christ emphasize or exaggerate Jesus’s genitalia? And
why were these phallic features of Renaissance religious painting not openly discussed and debated in art
historical scholarship until 1983? These questions are at the heart of this course. In order to answer them
we will examine the art critic Leo Steinberg’s groundbreaking book, The Sexuality of Christ in Renaissance
Art and in Modern Oblivion (1983) and the dramatic responses Steinberg’s book engendered. 6 credits; LA;
Winter; Jessica F Keating
ARTH 327 A History of Campus Planning This course considers the history of academic campuses in the
United States, using Carleton as a detailed case study. We will examine campus design in relation to social
history, treating campuses as complex educational districts reshaped over time to adapt to changing
institutional priorities. Topics will include the founding of sectarian colleges, land‐grant universities, and
state normal schools; collegiate gothic and modernist design; the GI Bill® and other education policies;
beaux‐arts planning; sustainability initiatives; etc. Utilizing primary documents in the college archives,
students will research Carleton’s planning history, culminating in a spring‐term exhibition at the Perlman
Teaching Museum. Prerequisite: Two Art History courses, or instructor consent. 6 credits; LA; Not offered
2022‐23
ARTH 341 Art and Democracy What does it mean to say that a work of art is “democratic?" For whom is art
made? And who can lay claim to the title “artist?" These questions animate contemporary art production as
artists grapple with the problems of broadening access to their works and making them more socially
relevant. In this course we will consider the challenges involved in making art for a sometimes ill‐defined
“public.” Topics to be discussed include: activist performance art, feminism, public sculpture, the Culture
Wars, queer visual culture, and the recent rise of social practice art. Prerequisite: Any two Art History
courses, or instructor permission. 6 credits; LA, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
ARTH 400 Integrative Exercise The integrative exercise for the art history major involves an independent
research project, on a topic chosen by the student and approved by faculty members, resulting in a
substantial essay due late in the winter term. One credit is awarded, usually in the spring term, for a formal
presentation that contextualizes the project and summarizes the argument of the essay. The other five
credits may be distributed in any fashion over the fall and winter terms. Art History 400 is a continuing
course; no grade will be awarded until all six credits are completed. 1‐6 credit; S/NC; Fall, Winter, Spring

Studio Art Courses (ARTS)
ARTS 110 Observational Drawing A beginning course for non‐majors and for those who contemplate
majoring in art. The aim of the course is to give the student an appreciation of art and of drawing. An
understanding of aesthetic values and development of technical skills are achieved through a series of
studio problems which naturally follow one another and deal with the analysis and use of line, shape,
volume, space, and tone. A wide range of subjects are used, including still life, landscape and the human
figure. 6 credits; ARP; Fall, Winter; David H Lefkowitz, Daniel P Bruggeman, Jade A Hoyer

56
ARTS 113 Field Drawing A beginning drawing course for students who are interested in developing their
skills in drawing from nature, to better see and understand their surroundings. Class material covers line,
form, dimension, value, perspective, and space using a variety of drawing materials. Subject matter
includes specimens, plant forms, and the landscape. Students will use a portable sketchbook, and classes
during the second part of the term are primarily outside. Locations include the Arb and field trips; access to
these sites does include walking on unpaved paths and uneven terrain. 6 credits; ARP; Fall, Spring; Eleanor
M Jensen
ARTS 114 European Architectural Studies Program: Introduction to Drawing Architecture Suitable for
students of any skill level, this course teaches different drawing techniques both in a classroom setting and
on location at various architectural sites. The course aims to hone observational and sketching skills and to
develop greater awareness of formal characteristics in the built environment. Consideration of line, tone,
shape, scale, surface, volume and other foundational concepts and technical skills will be emphasized.
Drawing practice will be reinforced with sketching assignments throughout the trip at different locations
and types of structures. 6 credits; ARP; Not offered 2022‐23
ARTS 117 Living London Program: Visualizing Renaissance England In this introductory course, devised for
all skill levels, students will explore England through on‐site observational drawing, watercolor, and mixed
media. The critical observation and artistic rendering of England’s artifacts, artwork, architecture, gardens,
and landscapes will afford students a window into British culture as they acquaint themselves with the
country’s visual vocabulary. The course will address the technical aspects of drawing, including how to use
line, value, composition, and color effectively. Additional components will include journaling, tours of
historical sites, and museum and gallery visits (including the National and National Portrait Galleries,
Hampton Court Palace, St. Paul’s Cathedral, etc.). Prerequisite: Participation in OCS Theater & Lit in London
program. 6 credits; ARP, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
ARTS 122 Introduction to Sculpture The ability to build structures that reflect or alter the environment is a
basic defining characteristic of our species. In this class we explore creative construction in three
dimensions using a variety of media, including plaster, wood, and steel. Using both natural and
architectural objects for inspiration, we will examine and manipulate form, space, and expressive content
to develop a deeper understanding of this core trait and reawaken our experience of the spaces we inhabit.
6 credits; ARP; Fall, Winter; Stephen Mohring
ARTS 128 Ceramics: Handbuilding Through History This course provides a historical framework through
which students will study clay’s crucial role in our everyday lives and in the advancement of civilization.
Texts and articles will guide the study of historical objects while videos and discussion provide a glimpse
into contemporary studio practice. Hands‐on projects in low fire and oil‐based clays will put knowledge into
action as students create 3D objects and 2D sketches and plans. Various firing processes are dependent on
access to the ceramics studio. Use of a digital camera (phone ok) is required. 6 credits; ARP; Not offered
2022‐23
ARTS 130 Beginning Ceramics This course is an introduction to wheel throwing and handbuilding as primary
methods of construction for both functional and non‐functional ceramic forms. An understanding of
ceramic history and technical skills are achieved through studio practice, readings, and demonstrations.
Emphasis is placed on the development of strong three‐dimensional forms as well as the relationship of
form to surface. Coursework includes a variety of firing techniques and development of surface design. 6
credits; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Kelly A Connole, Juliane Shibata

57
ARTS 139 Beginning Photography In this course students explore photography as a means of understanding
and interacting with both the world and the inner self. We will emphasize a balance of technical skills,
exploration of personal vision, and development of critical thinking and vocabulary relating to
photography. Beginning students will learn how to use analogue and digital cameras, to use basic studio
lighting equipment, and to print their own photographic work. Additionally, students will learn to develop a
portfolio as an ongoing process that requires informed and critical decision making to assemble a body of
work. Collectively we will critique, analyze, give feedback on work, and discuss readings that are pertinent
to the production of images in contemporary times. 6 credits; ARP; Fall, Winter; Xavier Tavera Castro
ARTS 142 The Book as Art Object With books we understand, in a contained object, specific qualities that an
author conveys through composition, sequence, and information in an art form. Students will balance the
cultivation of technical skills with exploration of personal vision in the creation and conceptualization of a
series of books taking into consideration the diverse students’ disciplines. The class incorporates both
digital and analog book technologies. We will analyze an array of publications from classical to
contemporary artist book, the journal, the fanzine, the comic book, the pulp, and the pamphlet. We will pay
special attention to the conceptual space of the book, sequencing and layout of images, production,
materials and distribution of books. Topics include the discussion of the decline and resurgence of the
physical book, the poetics of the books, the book as metaphor, the conceptual space of the book, and books
as narrative and non‐narrative sequences. 6 credits; ARP; Not offered 2022‐23
ARTS 151 Metalsmithing A basic course in metal design and fabrication of primarily jewelry forms and
functional objects. Specific instruction will be given in developing the skills of forming, joining, and surface
enrichment to achieve complex metal pieces. Students will learn to render two‐dimensional drawings while
exploring three‐dimensional design concepts. The course examines how jewelry forms relate to the human
body. Found materials will be used in addition to traditional metals including copper, brass, and silver. 6
credits; ARP; Fall, Winter; Danny J Saathoff
ARTS 180 Bookbinding This class will introduce the fundamentals of hand bookbinding with special
emphasis on making journals and albums. We will learn several different binding methods using historical
and non‐traditional techniques and a variety of different materials, tools and adhesives. In addition we will
cover basic box making. Boxes, like books, serve many purposes, one being to house and protect valuable
and fragile objects. We will make slipcases and clamshell boxes to protect books and prints. 6 credits; ARP;
Not offered 2022‐23
ARTS 210 Life Drawing Understanding the basic techniques of drawing the human form is fundamental to
an art education and is the emphasis of this class. Humans have been engaged in the act of self‐
representation since the beginning of time. The relationship artists have had with drawing the human body
is complex and has been the subject of religious, philosophical and personal investigation for centuries.
Concentrating on representational drawing techniques we will explore a variety of media and materials.
Supplemented by lectures, readings and critiques, students will develop an understanding of both
contemporary and historical approaches to drawing the human form. Our emphasis this term will be on
anatomy, the study of portraiture, and the complexity of hands and feet. Prerequisite: Studio Art 110, 113,
142 or 211. 6 credits; ARP; Spring; Daniel P Bruggeman
ARTS 211 Topics in Art and the Environment: Drawing the Anthropocene Focused around studio projects
emphasizing drawing media, this course explores the complexity and variety of representations of the
natural world. Students will be introduced to artists and writers who address the impact of human activity
on the environment from a range of historical and topical perspectives. Prerequisite: Studio Arts 110, 113,
114, 142 or instructor consent. 6 credits; ARP; Not offered 2022‐23

58
ARTS 212 Studio Art Seminar in the South Pacific: Mixed‐Media Drawing This course involves directed
drawing in bound sketchbooks, using a variety of drawing media, and requires ongoing, self‐directed
drawing in these visual journals. Subjects will include landscape, nature study, figure, and portraits. The
course will require some hiking in rugged areas. Prerequisite: Studio Art 110, 113, 114 or 142 or previous
comparable drawing experience approved by the professor. Participation in OCS program. 6 credits; ARP;
Winter; Eleanor M Jensen
ARTS 222 Sculptural Practice In this class we will expand upon your previous studio art coursework,
engaging multiple materials including plaster, wood, steel, and mixed media. Through a series of short and
two long term projects, we will explore the joys and challenges of working in three dimensions. You will
learn (or hone) basic building skills, mold‐making and plaster fabrication techniques, as well as basic metal
fabrication including cold work and welding mild steel. Prerequisite: Studio Arts 130, 151, 122, 322, 232,
327, 230, 252, Computer Science 232 or instructor consent. 6 credits; ARP; Spring; Stephen Mohring
ARTS 230 Ceramics: Throwing This course is focused on the creative possibilities of the pottery wheel as a
means to create utilitarian objects. Students are challenged to explore conceptual ideas while maintaining a
dedication to function. An understanding of aesthetic values and technical skills are achieved through
studio practice, readings, and demonstrations. Basic glaze and clay calculations, high fire and wood kiln
firing techniques, and a significant civic engagement component, known as the Empty Bowls Project, are
included in the course. Prerequisite: Studio Art 128, 130, 236 or high school experience with wheel
throwing and instructor permission. 6 credits; ARP; Spring; Kelly A Connole
ARTS 232 Ceramics: Handbuilding This course is an introduction to handbuilding as a primary method to
construct both functional and non‐functional ceramic forms with a focus on experimentation. An
understanding of aesthetic values and technical skills are achieved through studio practice, readings, and
demonstrations. Basic glaze and clay calculations, kiln firing techniques, and basic throwing methods will be
covered. Prerequisite: Studio Art 122, 128, 130, 150, 151, 236 or instructor consent. 6 credits; ARP; Winter;
Juliane Shibata
ARTS 234 The Figure in Clay This course is an introduction to the figurative and narrative potential of clay as
a sculptural medium. Through hands‐on demonstrations, lectures, readings, and assignments students will
develop an understanding of both contemporary and historical approaches to forming the human figure in
clay. The relationship artists have with the human body is complex and has been the subject of religious,
philosophical and personal investigation for centuries. This course will analyze this relationship while
developing technical skills in construction and firing techniques specific to ceramics. Prerequisite: Studio Art
122, 128, 130 or instructor's consent. 6 credits; ARP; Not offered 2022‐23
ARTS 236 Ceramics: Vessels for Tea Students will learn techniques used by Japanese potters, and those
from around the world, to make vessels associated with the production and consumption of tea. Both
handbuilding and wheel throwing processes will be explored throughout the term. We will investigate how
Japanese pottery traditions, especially the Mingei “arts of the people” movement of the 1920s, have
influenced contemporary ceramics practice in the United States and how cultural appropriation impacts
arts practice. Special attention will be paid to the use of local materials from Carleton’s Arboretum as well
as wood firing and traditional raku processes. Prerequisite: Requires concurrent registration in Art History
266. 6 credits; ARP, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
ARTS 243 Fundamentals of Photography In this course we will explore photography as a means of
understanding and interacting with both the world and the inner self. We will emphasize a balance of
technical skills, exploration of personal vision, and development of critical thinking and vocabulary relating

59
to photography. Our own image making will be considered in the context of photographic history, visual
literacy, and the universe of imagery in which we live. We will work with Photoshop, scanners, printers, and
digital cameras, as well as cell phone cameras, and found images. We encourage students to bring their
own digital camera, however we do have some digital cameras to loan out. Prerequisite: Studio Art 110,
113, 114, or 142 or instructor consent. 6 credits; ARP; Not offered 2022‐23
ARTS 244 Alternative Processes Over the last half century, the media environment has become dominantly
digital, and the practice of photography has been transformed into a digital one. In response, contemporary
artists and image makers have recently been pursuing analog practices in a search for more engaging
material output. In this course, students will be introduced to a series of alternative printing methods that
will result in tangible works. Instruction will be given in cyanotype, liquid light, Van Dyke brown printing,
and Platinum Palladium. Experimentation and creative departures will be highly encouraged. Prerequisite:
Previous Studio Art course. 6 credits; ARP; Winter; Xavier Tavera Castro
ARTS 245 Constructed Image In this course we will explore image making beyond the still photographic
image. Students will investigate the possibilities of construction and manipulation of photographic images
using various camera and darkroom methods including sequence, multiples, narrative, installation and book
formats, marking and altering photographic surfaces, using applied color, and toning both in‐camera and
manually. Special attention will be put into display and installation of the work produced. Prerequisite: One
100 level Studio Arts courses or instructor consent. 6 credits; ARP; Spring; Xavier Tavera Castro
ARTS 252 Metalsmithing: Ancient Techniques, New Technologies This course focuses on lost wax casting,
3D modeling and printing, and stone setting as methods to create jewelry and small sculptural objects in
bronze and silver. Specific instruction will be given in the proper use of tools, torches, and other equipment,
wax carving, and general metalsmithing techniques. Through the use of 3D modeling software and 3D
printing, new technologies will expedite traditional processes allowing for a broad range of metalworking
possibilities. Previous experience with metalsmithing is not required but may be helpful. Prerequisite:
Studio Arts 122, 130, 151, 230, 232, 252, 322, 327, Computer Science 232 or instructor consent. 6 credits;
ARP; Spring; Danny J Saathoff
ARTS 260 Painting The course serves as an introduction to the language of painting. Students develop a
facility with the physical tools of painting‐‐brushes, paint and surfaces‐‐as they gain a fluency with the basic
formal elements of the discipline‐‐color, form, value, composition and space. Students are also challenged
to consider the choices they make in determining the content and ideas expressed in the work, and how to
most effectively convey them. Prerequisite: Studio Art 110, 113, 114, or instructor consent. 6 credits; ARP;
Fall, Winter; David H Lefkowitz
ARTS 273 Studio Art Seminar in the South Pacific: Printmaking Intaglio and relief printmaking. Students will
receive instruction in all of the processes of intaglio and relief printmaking. Students will explore the
possibilities of these forms of printmaking in conjunction with their work in the drawing class. Prerequisite:
Studio Arts 110, 113 or 114 and acceptance in OCS Program. 6 credits; ARP; Winter; Eleanor M Jensen
ARTS 274 Printmaking – Silkscreen and Relief Students will work in two primary printmaking media: relief
and/or silkscreen. Through printmaking techniques, layering, color mixing, and generating multiples,
students will explore how to develop a narrative in their work and build upon skills established
in prerequisite drawing classes. Prerequisite: Studio Art 110, 113, 114 or instructor consent. 6 credits; ARP;
Fall, Winter, Spring; Jade A Hoyer
ARTS 275 Studio Art Program: The Physical and Cultural Environment This is a wide‐ranging course that asks
students to engage with their surroundings and make broad connections during the South Pacific program.

60
It examines ecological topics, such as natural history, invasive species, conservation efforts, and how the
physical landscape has changed since colonialism. Students will also study indigenous people’s history,
culture, art, and profound relationship to landscape. This course includes readings, films, local speakers,
and diverse site visits. Prerequisite: Acceptance to Carleton OCS program. 6 credits; S/CR/NC; SI, IS; Winter;
Eleanor M Jensen
ARTS 277 Printmaking: Relief Processes The subject will introduce the basics of Relief printmaking. It will
explore different mark making and cutting techniques (both traditional and contemporary) suitable for use
with a selection of relief printing and registration methods. Relief will cover the use of the reduction (single
plate) and multi‐plate processes using wood, metal or plastic plates. Safe printing and studio procedures
will also be introduced. The subject will look at ways to create drawings as suitable aids for the relief
process. Experimentation will be fostered using a variety of tools and print processes to make a series of
investigative works. The relief process will be directly linked to its historical origins. Prerequisite: Studio Arts
110, 113, 114, 210, 211 or 212 or instructor consent. 6 credits; ARP; Not offered 2022‐23
ARTS 278 Printmaking: Intaglio Processes The subject will introduce the basics of Intaglio printmaking. It will
explore mark making techniques through the use of a variety of different tools. Traditional intaglio
techniques will be covered including hard and soft ground (lift ground), aquatint and dry‐point. Copper
plate etching along with single and multi‐plate printing and registration processes will be covered. Safe
printing and studio procedures will also be introduced. The subject will look at ways to create drawings as
suitable aids for the intaglio process. Experimentation will be fostered using a variety of tools and print
processes to make a series of investigative works. The intaglio process will be directly linked to its historical
origins. Prerequisite: Studio Arts 110, 113, 114, 210, 211 or 212 or instructor consent. 6 credits; ARP; Not
offered 2022‐23
ARTS 298 Junior Studio Art Practicum Required for the studio major, and strongly recommended for the
junior year, this seminar is for student artists considering lives as producers of visual culture. At the core of
the course are activities that help build students’ identities as practicing artists. These include the selection
and installation of artwork for the Junior Show, a presentation about their own artistic development, and
studio projects in media determined by each student that serve as a bridge between media‐specific studio
art courses and the independent creative work they will undertake as Seniors in Comps. The course will also
include reading and discussion about what it means to be an artist today, encounters with visiting artists
and trips to exhibition venues in the Twin Cities. 3 credits; S/CR/NC; NE; Spring; Xavier Tavera Castro
ARTS 322 Sculpture 2: Form and Context In this intimate and nimble seminar, we will continue our
exploration of the many wonders of sculpture, further developing our previous studio‐based investigations.
During several short and two prolonged problem‐based assignments we will work to develop our personal
voice and a more nuanced material expression in our art. We’ll be introducing interior and exterior site‐
specific installation, casting, advanced woodworking and welding techniques, as well as the potential for
interactive robotics and digital media, to the range of possibilities. In Arts 322 you are free to explore the
processes that most intrigue you‐‐no specific material or sculptural format will be required. Prerequisite:
Studio Art 122, 150, 151, 232 or instructor permission. 6 credits; ARP; Not offered 2022‐23
ARTS 327 Woodworking: The Table This class explores the wondrous joys and enlightening frustrations of
an intensive material focus in wood. From the perspective of both functional and non‐functional design, we
will examine wood's physical, visual, philosophical, and expressive properties. Several short projects will
culminate in an examination of the table as a conceptual construct, and six week design/build challenge.
Prerequisite: Studio Art 122, 222 or instructor permission. 6 credits; ARP; Fall; Stephen Mohring

61
ARTS 330 Advanced Ceramics Designed to build on previous coursework in ceramics, this course focuses on
sophisticated handbuilding and throwing techniques and advanced problem solving. Development of a
personal voice is encouraged through open‐ended assignments deepening exploration into the expressive
nature of clay. Glaze calculations, kiln firing theory, and alternative firing techniques will broaden
approaches to surface design. This course can be repeated for credit. Prerequisite: Studio Art 128, 130,
230, 232, 234 or 236 or instructor consent. 6 credits; ARP; Spring; Kelly A Connole
ARTS 332 Ceramic Design: The Vase In this seminar students expand on their knowledge of handbuilding
and throwing techniques to focus specifically on the creation of vessels to hold flowers. A review of historic
and contemporary vase forms will lead to exercises in designing objects that interact with natural materials.
Surface design will focus on the use of local materials including clay from Carleton's Arboretum and wood
ash from the studio's wood kiln. Prerequisite: Two Ceramics courses (Studio Art 130, 230, 232, 234, 236 or
330) or instructor consent. 2 credits; ARP; Not offered 2022‐23
ARTS 339 Advanced Photography In this course students explore photography as a means of understanding
and interacting with both the world and the inner self. We will emphasize a balance of technical skills,
exploration of personal vision, and development of critical thinking and vocabulary relating to photography.
Advanced students will focus on developing a concise body of work independently through two self‐
directed longer projects. Instruction includes: use of large format cameras with a hand meter, film
scanning, and strobe lighting. Students will learn to develop a portfolio as an ongoing process that requires
informed and critical decision making to assemble a body of work. Collectively we will critique, analyze, give
feedback on work and discuss readings that are pertinent to the production of images in contemporary
times. Prerequisite: Studio Art 140, 141, 238 or 240, 243 or instructor permission. 6 credits; ARP; Not
offered 2022‐23
ARTS 360 Advanced Painting and Drawing This course is designed for students who want to explore these 2‐
D media in greater depth. Students may choose to work exclusively in painting or drawing, or may combine
media if they like. Some projects in the course emphasize strengthening students' facility in traditional uses
of each medium, while others are designed to encourage students to challenge assumptions about what a
painting or drawing can be. Projects focus on art making as an evolving process and a critical engagement
with systems of visual representation. Prerequisite: Either Studio Art 260 or two of the following courses:
Studio Art 110, 113, 114, 210, 212, 273, 274. 6 credits; ARP; Spring; David H Lefkowitz
ARTS 374 Advanced Printmaking and Book Arts This course is a continuation from the introductory level
print courses, offering instruction in any of the print media‐‐intaglio, relief, silk‐screen, lithography and
letterpress. In addition, several binding techniques are taught, and some of the assignments can be fulfilled
by book‐based projects. Prerequisite: Studio Art 273 or 274. 6 credits; ARP; Not offered 2022‐23
ARTS 398 Senior Studio Art Practicum Required for the studio major in the senior year, this seminar is
designed to prepare emerging artists for continued studio practice. This class engages students in the
process of presentation of artwork in a professional setting (the senior art exhibition) and in various other
capacities. Students engage with visiting artists, readings, and exhibitions as they begin to develop their
own independent paths towards studio work outside of the academic setting. 3 credits; S/CR/NC; NE;
Spring; Xavier Tavera Castro
ARTS 400 Integrative Exercise The integrative exercise for the studio arts major consists of an independent
research project involving experimentation, reflection, and deep engagement in the production of a
cohesive body of artwork. The comps process is designed to give students the opportunity to develop ideas
over the course of a term with close advice and support of the studio faculty and fellow students. Typically,

62
students register for 6 credits in Fall or Winter. In rare cases and in consultation with the studio faculty,
exceptions may be made to allow comps to be spread over two terms. 1‐6 credit; S/NC; Fall, Winter,
Spring

Asian Languages and Literatures
The department of Asian Languages and Literatures offers introductory, intermediate, and advanced
courses in Chinese and Japanese language, plus a variety of courses in traditional and modern
Chinese and Japanese literature and culture in English translation and some linguistics courses
related to Asian Languages. Accommodation can be made for students who can speak, but cannot
read or write the languages. At the intermediate level, students are encouraged to participate in one
of several approved academic programs in China or Japan. A major in Chinese or Japanese is
available by petition.
Requirements for the Chinese Minor
A total of six courses (36 credits), passed with a C- or better from the following two categories:



Four or five language courses beyond CHIN 204 including CHIN 205, CHIN 206 and any 300‐level
course except CHIN 310.
One or two content courses in English from CHIN 282, any Chinese courses numbered 230‐270,
ASLN 111, ASLN 260

Appropriate language courses taken on overseas programs can apply.
Requirements for the Japanese Minor
A total of six courses (36 credits), passed with a C- or better from the following two categories:



Four or five language courses beyond JAPN 204 including JAPN 205, JAPN 206 and any 300‐level
course except JAPN 310.
One or two content courses in English from any Japanese courses numbered 230‐270, ASLN 111,
ASLN 260

Appropriate language courses taken on overseas programs can apply.
Asian Language Courses (ASLN)
ASLN 111 Writing Systems The structure and function of writing systems, with emphasis on a comparison of
East Asian writing systems (Chinese, Japanese, Korean) to Western alphabetic systems. Topics covered
include classification of writing systems, historical development, diffusion and borrowing of writing
systems, and comparison with non‐writing symbol systems. 6 credits; SI; Not offered 2022‐23

Chinese Courses (CHIN)
CHIN 101 Elementary Chinese Introduction to Chinese sentence structure and writing system, together with
the development of basic aural/oral skills, with attention to the cultural context. Students who have
learned spoken Mandarin Chinese at home or in another context, but who are unable to read or write, are
encouraged to register for Chinese 280. 6 credits; NE; Fall; Shaohua Guo

63
CHIN 102 Elementary Chinese Continuation of Chinese 101. Prerequisite: Chinese 101 or equivalent. 6
credits; NE; Winter; Lin Deng
CHIN 103 Elementary Chinese Continuation of Chinese 101, 102. Prerequisite: Chinese 102 or equivalent. 6
credits; NE; Spring; Lei Yang
CHIN 204 Intermediate Chinese Expansion of vocabulary and learning of complex sentence forms, with
equal emphasis on the development of the four skills: reading, writing, speaking, and listening
comprehension. Prerequisite: Chinese 103 or equivalent. 6 credits; NE; Fall; Lin Deng, Lei Yang
CHIN 205 Intermediate Chinese Continuation of Chinese 204. Completion of this course with a C‐ or better
fulfills the language requirement. Prerequisite: Chinese 204, Chinese 280 or placement. 6 credits; NE;
Winter; Lin Deng, Lei Yang
CHIN 206 Chinese in Cultural Context This course advances students' proficiency in oral and written
Chinese, at the same time integrating elements of traditional Chinese civilization and modern Chinese
society. Emphasis is on cultural understanding and appropriate language use. Prerequisite: Chinese 205 or
equivalent. 6 credits; Spring; Lin Deng
CHIN 239 Digital China: Media, Culture, and Society This course invites students to critically examine digital
media technologies in relation to social change, cultural innovation, and popular entertainment. Drawing
on literature from media, literary, and cultural studies, the course engages in topics such as new media
institutions, Internet businesses, global activism, gender and sexuality, and mobile applications. Special
attention is paid to the implications that digital media bring forth within particular social and historical
contexts, as well as the ways in which the Internet serves as the site for the negotiation of various political,
economic, and cultural forces. In translation. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
CHIN 240 Chinese Cinema in Translation This course introduces to students the drastic transformation of
Chinese society, culture, and politics over the past three decades through the camera lens. We will examine
representative films from Mainland China, Hong Kong, and Taiwan. Particular attention will be paid to the
entangled relationship between art, commerce, and politics, as well as the role digital technologies and
international communities play in reshaping the contemporary cultural landscape in China. This class
requires no prior knowledge of Chinese language, literature, or culture. 6 credits; LA; Not offered 2022‐23
CHIN 245 Chinese Vision of the Past in Translation China—the modern nation—never escapes the influence
of the past. But why do Chinese literature and movies like discussing and presenting the past? Do these
works truly reflect the past? How is the past presented? What techniques impact the narration of the past
and the audience’s perceptions? Through comparison of historic texts and fictional retellings of the same
stories, students will gain a better understanding of representation of the past and develop critical reading,
analysis, discussion, and writing skills. Sources include historical narratives and biographies, classical texts,
poems, fiction, and film. No knowledge of Chinese language required. 6 credits; LA; Not offered 2022‐23
CHIN 250 Chinese Popular Culture in Translation This course (taught in English) provides an overview of
Chinese popular culture from 1949 to the contemporary era, including popular literature, film, posters,
music, and blog entries. The course examines both old and new forms of popular culture in relation to
social change, cultural spaces, new media technologies, the state, individual expressions, and gender
politics. Throughout this course, special attention is paid to the alliance between popular literature and the
booming entertainment industry, the making of celebrity culture, and the role digital media plays in shaping
China's cultural landscape. The course requires no prior knowledge of Chinese language, literature, or
culture. 6 credits; LA, IS; Winter; Shaohua Guo

64
CHIN 251 Heroes, Heroines, Exceptional Lives in Chinese Biographical Histories Through generic and
historical analysis of the two‐millennia long biographical tradition in Chinese historical writing, this project
explores lives of heroes and heroines, including, but not limited to: dynastic founders, ministers, generals,
poets, assassins, and exceptional women. In this introduction to premodern Chinese culture and literature,
students will experience, in English translation, some of the most beautiful works of ancient Chinese
literature from the second century BCE through the eighteenth century CE. No prior Chinese language study
required. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
CHIN 252 The Chinese Language: A Linguistic and Cultural Survey This course offers a unique introduction to
the Chinese language for anyone curious about its defining characteristics and how they shaped, impacted,
or relate to certain social, political, and cultural practices and traditions in China, present and past. This
course will prepare students with the knowledge to make informed judgment on common misconceptions
or prejudices, by non‐Chinese and Chinese speakers, concerning the Chinese language or its writing system.
Students are expected to learn about some general linguistic concepts and notions in regard to structural
features of human language and its relationship with mind, society, and culture through this course. No
prior knowledge of Chinese or linguistics is required. 6 credits; HI; Fall; Lin Deng
CHIN 258 Classical Chinese Thought: Wisdom and Advice from Ancient Masters Behind the skyscrapers and
the modern technology of present‐day China stand the ancient Chinese philosophers, whose influence
penetrates every aspect of society. This course introduces the teachings of various foundational thinkers:
Confucius, Mencius, Laozi, Sunzi, Zhuangzi, and Hanfeizi, who flourished from the fifth‐second centuries
B.C. Topics include kinship, friendship, self‐improvement, freedom, the art of war, and the relationship
between human beings and nature. Aiming to bring Chinese wisdom to the context of daily life, this course
opens up new possibilities to better understand the self and the world. No knowledge of Chinese is
required. 6 credits; HI, IS; Spring; Lei Yang
CHIN 280 Chinese Literacy This course is aimed at fluent Mandarin speakers who have not learned to read
and write. Students will intensively study the same characters as taught in Chinese 101, 102, 103, and 204.
Successful completion will allow students to register for Chinese 205 in the winter term. Prerequisite: Near‐
native fluency in oral Mandarin. 6 credits; NE; Fall; Shaohua Guo
CHIN 347 Advanced Chinese: Reading the News This course uses internet readings of various Chinese
language news sources to learn about multiple Chinese perspectives on current events, and to become
conversant in the prose style that is a model for formal written Chinese. Emphasis is on vocabulary
expansion, text comprehension strategies, and differences between colloquial and written usage. Active
use of the language (including oral discussion and regular written compositions) will be stressed. Students
will learn to become savvy, independent consumers of Chinese‐language news media. Prerequisite: Chinese
206 or equivalent. 6 credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐23
CHIN 348 Advanced Chinese: The Mass Media This course introduces to students major milestones in the
development of Chinese cinema since 1980, with additional materials including popular television shows
and online materials. Emphasis will be on culturally appropriate language use, and on discussion of the
social issues that are implicitly and explicitly addressed on the Chinese‐language media. The course aims to
increase students' fluency in all four aspects of Chinese language learning (listening, speaking, reading,
writing) and to deepen students' understanding of China as a transitional society. Prerequisite: Chinese 206
or equivalent. 6 credits; NE, LA; Not offered 2022‐23
CHIN 349 Tasting China: Regional Geography and Food Culture This course creates a virtual journey that
enriches students’ knowledge and understanding of Chinese food culture in geographical context through a

65
range of textual and non‐textual materials including essays by renowned writers and food critics, illustrated
book chapters and magazine articles and reports, and acclaimed documentary films and videos. The course
will familiarize students with culturally authentic and stylistically appropriate vocabulary and structures
commonly found in cultural narratives, increase their ability to converse with extended discourse in topics
relating to food culture, and enhance their comprehension and writing skills of literary and written Chinese.
Prerequisite: Chinese 206 or equivalent. 6 credits; LA; Not offered 2022‐23
CHIN 350 Reading Chinese Comics This course selects a range of popular comics as reading materials,
including stories based on traditional novels and fantasies, science fiction, children’s literature, and non‐
fiction. Students will gain important cultural and historical knowledge about China, expand vocabulary on a
variety of cultural and societal topics, and most importantly, develop proficiency in producing descriptions
and third‐person narratives both orally and in writing. Prerequisite: Chinese 206. 6 credits; LA, IS; Spring; Lin
Deng
CHIN 355 Contemporary Chinese Short Stories This advanced Chinese language course focuses on
contemporary short stories. The course is designed to help students enhance reading skills, expand
students' mastery of advanced vocabulary, and prepare students to analyze authentic materials. The
historical, cultural, and literary forces that shape these cultural works also will be examined. Prerequisite:
Chinese 206 or equivalent. 6 credits; LA; Fall; Shaohua Guo
CHIN 358 Advanced Chinese: Everyday Life in Ancient China Were chopsticks originally eating utensils? Did
ancient Chinese sleep on beds and sit on chairs? What did they wear? In this course, students will find
answers to questions like those in a series of expository writings concerning various aspects of daily life in
ancient Chinese society, while enhancing their proficiency in comprehending authentic materials and
producing extended discourse on related topics through a variety of oral and written coursework. This
course also provides a fair amount of exposure to common sources for historical studies of China, and thus
expands students’ vocabulary and knowledge about Chinese history and archaeology. Prerequisite: Chinese
206 or equivalent. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
CHIN 360 Classical Chinese This course introduces to students the essentials of classical Chinese through a
close reading of authentic materials. A wide range of genres, including prose, poems, idioms, and short
stories, will be introduced to enrich students’ understanding of various writing conventions and styles. The
historical, cultural, and literary forces that shape these cultural works also will be examined. Prerequisite:
Chinese 206 or equivalent. 6 credits; LA; Winter; Lei Yang
CHIN 361 Advanced Chinese: Readings in Twentieth Century Literature Students will read, discuss, and
write about major literary works from twentieth century China in order to both improve their language
abilities and increase their understanding of the artistic and intellectual milieu in which the works were
produced. Readings will include selections from modern and contemporary Chinese literature, including
poetry, fiction, novels, and letters in the original Chinese. Prerequisite: Chinese 206 or equivalent. 6
credits; LA; Not offered 2022‐23
CHIN 362 Advanced Chinese: Traditional Culture in Modern Language This course explores Chinese
traditional culture in advanced Mandarin Chinese. The long history and rich culture in premodern China
have produced a precious legacy that has been widely inherited by contemporary China and significantly
impacted the modern society. To better understand present‐day China and the Chinese language, it is
crucial for advanced learners to track the evolution back while acquiring higher‐level vocabulary and
structures. Lesson topics center on literature, language, writing, and so on. Many of our texts are from

66
ancient Chinese stories (Mencius, Brotherhood, Language of Flowers, Dream of Red Mansions, etc.)
Prerequisite: Chinese 206 or equivalent. 6 credits; LA; Not offered 2022‐23
CHIN 364 Chinese Classic Tales and Modern Adaptation This course introduces to students influential
Chinese classic tales and their modern adaptation across media platforms. Students improve their listening
and speaking skills through viewing and discussing visual materials. Students develop their reading and
writing proficiencies through analyzing authentic texts, formulating their own arguments, and writing
critical essays. The overarching goal of this course is to increase students’ fluency in all aspects of Chinese
language learning and to deepen students’ understanding of the role that cultural tradition plays in shaping
China’s present. Prerequisite: Chinese 206 or equivalent (students who have taken one 300‐level course at
Carleton are qualified to register). 6 credits; LA; Not offered 2022‐23

Japanese Courses (JAPN)
JAPN 101 Elementary Japanese Introduction to the Japanese sentence structure and writing system,
together with the development of basic aural/oral skills, with attention to cultural context. 6 credits; NE;
Fall; Noboru Tomonari
JAPN 102 Elementary Japanese Continuation of Japanese 101. Prerequisite: Japanese 101 or equivalent. 6
credits; NE; Winter; Chie Tokuyama
JAPN 103 Elementary Japanese Continuation of Japanese 102. Prerequisite: Japanese 102 or equivalent. 6
credits; NE; Spring; Chie Tokuyama
JAPN 204 Intermediate Japanese Emphasis is on the development of reading skills, especially the mastery of
kanji, with some work on spoken Japanese through the use of audiovisual materials. Prerequisite: Japanese
103 or equivalent. 6 credits; NE; Fall; Miaki Habuka
JAPN 205 Intermediate Japanese Continuation of Japanese 204. Completion of this course with a C‐ or
better fulfills language requirement. Prerequisite: Japanese 204 or equivalent. 6 credits; NE; Winter; Miaki
Habuka
JAPN 206 Japanese in Cultural Context This course advances students' proficiency in the four skills of
speaking, listening, reading and writing in Japanese. The course also integrates elements of traditional
Japanese civilization and modern Japanese society, emphasizing cultural understanding and situationally
appropriate language use. Prerequisite: Japanese 205 or equivalent. 6 credits; NE; Spring; Noboru Tomonari
JAPN 231 Tradition and Modernity: Japanese Cinema in Translation This course examines the extraordinary
achievement of Japanese cinema, from the classic films of Mizoguchi, Ozu, and Kurosawa to the pop cinema
of Kitano and the phenomenon of anime. The films will be studied for their aesthetic, cultural, and auteur
contexts. Particular attention will be paid to the relationship of the film to traditional arts, culture and
society. This course is conducted in English and all the course materials are in English translation or in
English subtitles. 6 credits; LA; Not offered 2022‐23
JAPN 244 The World of Anime in Translation This course examines the extraordinary achievement of anime
(Japanese animation), from the modern classics by Hayao Miyazaki, Isao Takahata, and Mamoru Oshii, to
more recent anime directors. The anime will be studied for their aesthetic, cultural, and auteur contexts.
Particular attention will be paid to the relationship of the anime to traditional arts, culture and society. This
course is conducted in English and all the course materials are in English translation or in English subtitles. 6
credits; LA; Not offered 2022‐23

67
JAPN 245 Modern Japanese Literature and Manga in Translation This course is a study of major works of
modern fiction in Japan and their recent adaptations in manga. We will pay particular attention to cultural,
aesthetic, and ideological aspects of Japanese literature in the twentieth century and to the relationship
between the text, the author, and the society. We will also read their adaptations in manga. Manga has
become the most popular literary medium during the last century and we will consider the relationship
between modern Japanese literature and manga. This class requires no prior knowledge of Japanese
language, literature, manga, or culture. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
JAPN 246 Monsters and Japan The monster always escapes and always returns. This course examines how
the concept of monstrousness has manifested in Japan throughout the ages, taking different forms to
reflect changing conditions. Surveying a broad range of media, including literature, theater, manga, and
anime, we will compare chimeric expressions of otherness in Japanese culture. No Japanese language is
required. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
JAPN 248 Modern Japanese Literature: A Survey on Modern Japanese Aesthetics This course offers an
introduction to modern theories of art, with an emphasis on the origin of modern Japanese literature
(1868‐1945) and its newly cultivated aesthetic sensibilities. What are the defining characteristics of
literature and what are its values in society? How is our aesthetic taste for beauty determined? The course
surveys the field of modern Japanese literature, exploring the newly instituted notion of “literature” and
the lofty role its pursuit of “beauty” played, as writers insisted, in enlightening the modern denizens living
the age of uncertainty. Topics of inquires include how the shift in aesthetic taste for beauty correlated with
the change in human relation to the natural world, and what moral implication it entailed. We explore
answers to these questions by close‐reading various cultural texts. Other readings will range historically and
cross‐culturally from premodern indigenous discourse on beauty to the nineteenth century Western
aesthetic 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
JAPN 249 Introduction to Contemporary Japan and Literature This course provides an introduction to
contemporary Japan through a variety of literary works dating from the early postwar period (1945) to the
present. While becoming familiar with prize‐winning Japanese writers, literary genres, and various artistic
conventions, we will examine how writers reacted to, shaped, and critiqued historical events and social
situations in which these literary texts are written. Topics for discussion include: war memory, postwar
economic success, loss of national identity, shifting concepts of families, gender roles, and lifestyles,
minorities, alienation, and disaster. Through readings, lectures, and discussions, you will become familiar
with major cultural and historical movements that comprise the complexity of contemporary Japan, and
develop the critical skills necessary to analyze literary texts. All readings are in English, and no background
knowledge of Japan is required. 6 credits; LA, IS; Fall; Chie Tokuyama
JAPN 254 World of Japanese Manga in Translation This course will examine manga (Japanese comic books
that first appeared in post‐World War II Japan). Manga are avidly read in Japan as a main component of
Japanese popular culture. They have a huge influence on other media such as films and anime. The genre
has greatly expanded its readership outside of Japan during the last decade. We will read a variety of
manga aimed at different gender and age groups, in English translation. The texts will be interpreted as a
means of understanding the world‐views of the Japanese, and how Japanese society has evolved in recent
decades. 6 credits; LA, IS; Winter; Noboru Tomonari
JAPN 342 Advanced Reading in Modern Japanese Manga Introduction to canonical authors in modern
Japanese manga in the original with exposure to a variety of themes and styles. Some practice in critical
analysis. Prerequisite: Japanese 206 or the equivalent. 6 credits; LA; Not offered 2022‐23

68
JAPN 343 Advanced Japanese: Human‐Nonhuman Relationship in Japanese Popular Media This course
explores Japanese popular media from an environmental perspective. The course incorporates prose, live‐
action films, and animation produced from 1868 through the present and attends to political, cultural, and
philosophical events that ran parallel to developments and changes in the human relationship with the
non‐human world. By close‐reading cultural texts produced in different eras, we will explore what options
were available for rebuilding a sustainable environment in modern and contemporary Japan. Themes of
exploration include modernization, internal colonization, gender, and industrial disaster, while familiarizing
ourselves with an array of canonical authors and issues of global relevance. Students will develop skills in
comprehending diverse cultural materials and outputting their integrated knowledge through in‐class
discussion and written assignments. Prerequisite: Japanese 206 or equivalent. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered
2022‐23
JAPN 344 Japan Trends: Lifestyle, Society, and Culture In this advanced Japanese language course, we will
explore a wide range of concepts, social media buzzwords, and cultural phenomena that constitute the
fabric of everyday life in Japan today. From “geeks” and “idols” dominating the cultural scene to the
“working poor” and “hikikomori,” who represent the precarity Japan faces in the contexts of economic,
political and psychological crisis, the course delves into the aspects of key phenomena surrounding
contemporary Japanese society. You will develop skills to read, analyze, summarize, and critique various
texts written in Japanese, including newspaper articles, scholarly essays, literary texts, and films, while
becoming familiar with historical contexts in which these keywords emerged and are used. Prerequisite:
Japanese 206 or equivalent. 6 credits; LA, IS; Fall; Chie Tokuyama
JAPN 345 Advanced Reading in Modern Japanese Literature: The Short Story Introduction to modern
Japanese short fiction in the original, with exposure to a variety of styles. Some practice in critical analysis
and literary translation. Prerequisite: Japanese 206 or the equivalent. 6 credits; LA; Winter; Noboru
Tomonari
JAPN 351 Advanced Japanese through Documentary Film In this course we will subtitle in English a
Japanese documentary film and also read the script and/or other related materials. The course aims to
improve understanding of spoken Japanese at a natural pace, to improve the skill in reading of Japanese
texts, and to comprehend some aspects of contemporary Japan. Students are expected to participate
actively in the discussion of the film and the subtitles. Prerequisite: Japanese 206 or equivalent. 6 credits;
NE; Not offered 2022‐23
JAPN 353 Thinking about Environmental Issues in Japanese This course explores various environmental
issues, pollution, recycle, etc., in Japanese using newspaper clips, internet, and other authentic written
texts. We will examine what kind of environmental issues Japan faces and how the government and
communities are dealing with them. Then students are expected to explore how their communities are
dealing with environmental issues. The purpose of the course is to encourage students to think about
issues, contents, in Japanese rather than study purely language, grammar and vocabularies. Students are
expected to write a short research paper in Japanese and do class presentation at the end. Prerequisite:
Japanese 206 or equivalent. 6 credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐23
JAPN 357 Puppets, Dolls, Robots, and Vocaloids in Japanese Culture This course examines the
representations and meanings of puppets, dolls, robots, and vocaloids in Japan from the seventeenth
century until the twenty‐first century. The Japanese developed their own strands of puppet cultures,
starting in early modern Japan where the Japanese came to privilege puppets in the form of bunraku
theater. Puppets functioned as a useful means for Japanese rhetoric and self‐expression, and this has been
the case especially in popular culture. We will watch films, videos, and read works of fiction and manga to

69
interpret Japan through puppets and their recent equivalents. Prerequisite: Japanese 206 or equivalent. 6
credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐23

Asian Studies
Founded in 1964, the program in Asian Studies is administered by a committee of faculty drawn
from multiple departments. It involves a wide variety of courses and activities aimed at enhancing
appreciation and understanding of the art, life, and thought of the cultures of Asia, past and present.
We concentrate on three regions: East Asia (China, Japan, Korea, Vietnam), South Asia
(Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Myanmar, Nepal, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, and Tibet), and
Central Asia (Afghanistan, Bhutan, Iran, the Islamic former Soviet republics, Manchuria, inner and
outer Mongolia, Tibet, Xinjiang). The program consists of courses on Asia in nine departments,
extracurricular events on campus, and off-campus studies. An interdisciplinary, regionally-focused
major in Asian Studies is offered, which is especially suitable for students with an overriding
interest in one or more regions of Asia whose academic needs cannot be met by majoring in a single
discipline. Students who do major in single discipline departments are strongly encouraged to minor
in East Asian Studies or South Asian Studies, although in exceptional cases a double major with
Asian Studies can be approved.
Requirements for the Asian Studies Major
A total of 66 credits:
I. 18 credits in a disciplinary‐based department: Art History, Asian Languages, History, Political
Science/International Relations, Religion, and Sociology and Anthropology which must include:



at least 12 credits in courses related to Asia
6 credits in an appropriate methodology course:
o ARTH 298 Seminar for Art History Majors
o CAMS 330 Cinema Studies Seminar
o HIST 298 Junior Colloquium
o LCST 245 The Critical Toolbox: Who's Afraid of Theory?
o POSC 230 Methods of Political Research
o RELG 300 Theories and Methods in the Study of Religion
o SOAN 330 Sociological Thought and Theory
o SOAN 331 Anthropological Thought and Theory

II. 42 additional credits in Asia-related courses (including appropriate off-campus credits,
excluding ASST 400 and language-department courses below 228 or their equivalents); these must
include:




at least 6 credits in each of three distribution areas: Literary/Artistic Analysis, Humanistic Inquiry,
and Social Inquiry
a maximum of 18 credits at the 100 level
a minimum of 24 credits at the 200 level or above

70

III. 6 credits of Senior Integrative Exercise (ASST 400), normally taken during winter term of
the senior year.
The Senior Integrative Exercise, normally is a research paper of 30 pages or more that delves into
some aspect of the student's focal region. The project normally is developed by the student during
the fall term, and proposed to, and approved by the Asian Studies Committee, which assigns two
faculty members as readers and advisers for the project. The first draft of the exercise is due by the
end of the ninth week of winter term, and a final draft by the end of the fourth week of spring term.
The student defends the project before the two readers, and presents the research publicly to
interested members of the community.
IV. A regional focus: East Asia (China, Japan, Korea, Vietnam), South Asia (Afghanistan,
Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Myanmar, Nepal, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Tibet), or Central Asia
(Afghanistan, Bhutan, Iran, the Islamic former Soviet republics, Manchuria, inner and outer
Mongolia, Tibet, Xinjiang) involving:



at least 48 credits (exclusive of the Senior Integrative Exercise) related to one's focal region
at least 6 credits related to an Asian region different from one's focal region.

Courses by regional focus, subdivided by distribution area:
EAST ASIA:


























ARTH 165 Japanese Art and Culture (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARTH 166 Chinese Art and Culture
ARTH 209 Chinese Painting (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARTH 220 The Origins of Manga: Japanese Prints
ARTH 266 Arts of the Japanese Tea Ceremony (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARTH 267 Gardens in China and Japan
ARTH 321 Arts of the Chinese Scholar's Studio (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARTS 236 Ceramics: Vessels for Tea (not offered in 2022‐23)
ASLN 111 Writing Systems (not offered in 2022‐23)
ASST 283 Japanese History and Culture (not offered in 2022‐23)
ASST 284 Japanese Linguistics in Kyoto Seminar: History and Culture of Japan
CHIN 206 Chinese in Cultural Context
CHIN 240 Chinese Cinema in Translation (not offered in 2022‐23)
CHIN 245 Chinese Vision of the Past in Translation (not offered in 2022‐23)
CHIN 250 Chinese Popular Culture in Translation
CHIN 251 Heroes, Heroines, Exceptional Lives in Chinese Biographical Histories (not offered in 2022‐
23)
CHIN 258 Classical Chinese Thought: Wisdom and Advice from Ancient Masters
CHIN 347 Advanced Chinese: Reading the News (not offered in 2022‐23)
CHIN 348 Advanced Chinese: The Mass Media (not offered in 2022‐23)
CHIN 350 Reading Chinese Comics
CHIN 355 Contemporary Chinese Short Stories
CHIN 360 Classical Chinese
CHIN 361 Advanced Chinese: Readings in Twentieth Century Literature (not offered in 2022‐23)
CHIN 362 Advanced Chinese: Traditional Culture in Modern Language (not offered in 2022‐23)
CHIN 364 Chinese Classic Tales and Modern Adaptation (not offered in 2022‐23)

71










































ECON 240 Microeconomics of Development
ECON 241 Growth and Development
HIST 100 Confucius and His Critics
HIST 150 Politics of Art in Early Imperial China
HIST 151 History of Modern Japan
HIST 152 History of Early China (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 153 History of Modern China (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 154 Social Movements in Postwar Japan (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 156 History of Modern Korea (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 157 Health and Medicine in Japan (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 159 Disaster, Disease, & Rumors in East Asia (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 215 Carleton in the Archives: Carleton in China (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 254 Colonialism in East Asia
HIST 255 Rumors, Gossip, and News in East Asia (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 256 Disaster, Disease, & Rumors in East Asia (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 257 Chinese Capitalism: From Local to Global
JAPN 206 Japanese in Cultural Context
JAPN 231 Tradition and Modernity: Japanese Cinema in Translation (not offered in 2022‐23)
JAPN 244 The World of Anime in Translation (not offered in 2022‐23)
JAPN 245 Modern Japanese Literature and Manga in Translation (not offered in 2022‐23)
JAPN 249 Introduction to Contemporary Japan and Literature
JAPN 254 World of Japanese Manga in Translation
JAPN 344 Japan Trends: Lifestyle, Society, and Culture
JAPN 345 Advanced Reading in Modern Japanese Literature: The Short Story
JAPN 351 Advanced Japanese through Documentary Film (not offered in 2022‐23)
JAPN 353 Thinking about Environmental Issues in Japanese (not offered in 2022‐23)
MUSC 182 Chinese Musical Instruments
MUSC 182J Chinese Musical Instruments (Juried)
MUSC 213 J‐Pop: Listening to Music in Modern Japan
MUSC 282 Chinese Musical Instruments
MUSC 282J Chinese Musical Instruments (Juried)
POSC 170 International Relations and World Politics
POSC 241 Ethnic Conflict (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 264 Politics of Contemporary China
RELG 100 Buddhism, Science, Society
RELG 152 Religions in Japanese Culture
RELG 153 Introduction to Buddhism
RELG 241 Islam in Asia: Lived Traditions and Meaning‐Making (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 254 Zen Buddhism
RELG 280 The Politics of Sex in Asian Religion (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 282 Samurai: Ethics of Death and Loyalty (not offered in 2022‐23)

SOUTH ASIA:







ECON 240 Microeconomics of Development
ECON 241 Growth and Development
ENGL 245 Bollywood Nation
ENGL 250 Indian Fiction 1880‐1980 (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 251 Contemporary Indian Fiction (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 252 Caribbean Fiction (not offered in 2022‐23)

72
































HIST 161 From Mughals to Mahatma Gandhi: An Introduction to Modern Indian History
HIST 266 History of Islam in South Asia (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 268 Globalization & Local Responses in India Program: History, Globalization, and Politics in
Modern India
HIST 270 Nuclear Nations: India and Pakistan as Rival Siblings
MUSC 180 Raga: Vocal or Instrumental Study of Hindustani Music
MUSC 180J Raga: Vocal or Instrumental Study of Hindustani Music (Juried)
MUSC 181 Sitar
MUSC 181J Sitar (Juried)
MUSC 248 Music of South Asia (not offered in 2022‐23)
MUSC 280 Raga: Vocal or Instrumental Study of Hindustani Music
MUSC 280J Raga:Voc/Instr Study Hindustani (Juried)
MUSC 281 Sitar
MUSC 281J Sitar (Juried)
POSC 170 International Relations and World Politics
POSC 241 Ethnic Conflict (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 378 Political Economy & Ecology of Southeast Asia: Social Changes in Southeast Asia (not
offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 379 Political Economy and Ecology of S.E. Asia: Diversity of Social Ecological Systems in
Southeast Asia (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 100 Buddhism, Science, Society
RELG 122 Introduction to Islam (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 153 Introduction to Buddhism
RELG 155 Hinduism: An Introduction
RELG 237 Yoga: Religion, History, Practice (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 241 Islam in Asia: Lived Traditions and Meaning‐Making (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 257 Asian Religions and Ecology
RELG 269 Food, Justice and Nonviolence: Hindu, Buddhist, and Jain Perspectives
RELG 280 The Politics of Sex in Asian Religion (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 283 Mysticism and Gender (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 289 Global Religions in Minnesota (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 362 Spirit Possession (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 365 Mysticism (not offered in 2022‐23)
SOAN 257 Culture and Politics in India (not offered in 2022‐23)

CENTRAL ASIA:









ECON 240 Microeconomics of Development
ECON 241 Growth and Development
HIST 254 Colonialism in East Asia
HIST 265 Central Asia in the Modern Age
HIST 360 Muslims and Modernity
RELG 122 Introduction to Islam (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 153 Introduction to Buddhism
RELG 241 Islam in Asia: Lived Traditions and Meaning‐Making (not offered in 2022‐23)

V. One year of study of an appropriate Asian language, or its equivalent
For languages offered at Carleton, this will involve completion of a language through 103, or its
equivalent. For languages not offered at Carleton, which may be studied through off-campus

73

programs, summer study, or special arrangement at Carleton, it will involve completion of the
equivalent of 103. Language (as opposed to literature) courses may not be applied to the major. The
following courses do not count towards the 66 credits needed for the Asian Studies major.





CHIN 101, 102, 103 Elementary Chinese
CHIN 204, 205 Intermediate Chinese
JAPN 101, 102, 103 Elementary Japanese
JAPN 204, 205 Intermediate Japanese

Languages available at Carleton through special arrangement may include: Uzbek (Adeeb Khalid),
Tamil (Kristin Bloomer).
VI. Normally, at least one term of off-campus study in Asia Students interested in studying in
Asia may apply to one of a number of overseas programs. Carleton College has several of its own
term-long off-campus studies programs. The Japanese Linguistics in Kyoto Off-Campus Seminar
offers courses in Japanese history and culture in addition to linguistics. The Carleton program in
Political Economy and Ecology of Southeast Asia provides opportunities for students to learn about
social and ecological changes in Thailand, Lao PDR and Myanmar. The Carleton program, India:
Globalization and Local Responses, focuses on social structures and institutions in India and the
intersections with development, sustainability and gender relations. The Buddhist Studies in India,
one of Carleton's Global Engagement Programs, introduces students to the diversity of Buddhist
traditions as lived in Bodh Gaya, a unique pilgrimage center in northern India.
Carleton also cooperates with several other colleges to sponsor the Associated Kyoto Program,
which takes 50 students and seven faculty members to Japan for an academic year. Carleton also
participates in a one-year program at Waseda University sponsored by the Associated Colleges of
the Midwest (ACM). The ACM Program in India consists of five months stay in Pune, where
students study Marathi, take academic courses centered on India, and investigate an independent
study topic. The program in Hong Kong at the Chinese University, also for students from ACM
institutions, normally lasts one year, though a semester-long program is also possible. Carleton,
Bates, Bowdoin, Colby, Swarthmore, Grinnell and Holy Cross jointly sponsor the Intercollegiate Sri
Lanka Education Program (ISLE), in which students and a faculty member study at the University
of Peradeniya near Kandy, the old capital in the middle of the island. Opportunities to study in Asia
also are available through a variety of non-Carleton programs and non-consortial programs.
Courses taken on off-campus programs may be applied to the major. Because of the paucity of
Carleton courses in South Asian languages or on many aspects of Central Asia, off-campus
programs generally form an important component of the major for those who focus in those two
Asian regions.
Asian Studies Courses (ASST)
ASST 100 The Cultural Life of Plants in China This seminar will examine the role of plants have played in
China from ancient times through the end of the imperial era. It will investigate the uses of different types
of plants (fruits, vegetables, flowers, grasses, etc.) in such areas as medicine, food, literature, art, and
landscape management. We will seek to understand the ways in which plants function across and make
connection between various aspects of human activities. In addition, the course will emphasize how plants
have actively helped form Chinese cultural practices and systems of meaning throughout various historical
periods. 6 credits; AI, WR1, IS; Fall; Kathleen M Ryor

74
ASST 110 Elementary Hindi‐Urdu This course will introduce students to basic spoken and written Hindi and
Urdu, languages spoken widely across India and Pakistan. The course will teach speaking, listening, reading
and writing skills as these are used in everyday social and cultural situations. While in elementary spoken
form Hindi and Urdu are almost indistinguishable, they are written in two distinct scripts, both of which
students will learn. 6 credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐23
ASST 130 Globalization & Local Responses in India Program: Tourism and Development in India This course
will examine concepts and practices regarding socio‐economic development in India, with a special focus on
the role of tourism as part of the process of globalization. We will study the scholarly writings and debates
around the varied agendas and ideologies concerning development, and analyze the different approaches
to economic growth that have historically been dominant in India. As part of our learning process, we will
visit numerous sites wherein economic development is being undertaken, including urban and rural locales
as well as tourist and pilgrimage sites. This course will include scholarly readings, instructor and guest
lectures, and require student presentations of their work. 3 credits; S/CR/NC; HI, IS; Winter; Brendan P
LaRocque
ASST 135 Exploring India: Orientation/Orientalism Images of India are ever‐present in American media and
pop culture. The land of Gandhi, call‐centers, a multitude of religious faiths, the Taj Mahal, oppressed
women, vast poverty and wealth. Come and learn about India, a region of immense contrasts and
diversities, home to more than one billion people. We will explore Indian history and geography, cuisine
and traditions, people and their languages, art, architecture and music, while being introduced to the Hindi
and Urdu languages. Our class materials will include scholarly writings, guest speakers, popular cinema,
documentary films, poetry, music, and food. 3 credits; HI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
ASST 255 Buddhist Studies in India Program: Introduction to Field Methods and Ethics This course
introduces students to the skills and ethics needed to conduct fieldwork for their independent study project
in South Asia. In consultation with their adviser, students generate an independent study proposal (ISP)
concerned with some aspect of Buddhist Studies (philosophy, ritual, meditation, the arts, culture, etc.)
utilizing the unique resources available in India and neighboring countries. The ISP proposal outlines the
topic, research methods, and resources located/developed by the student. Topics covered in the course
include: introduction to research ethics; conducting a literature review; design and implementation of data
collection protocols, interviewing, and survey questionnaires; summary, analysis and presentation data.
Prerequisite: Participation in Buddhist Studies in India Program. 3‐4 credits; NE; Fall; Arthur P McKeown
ASST 283 Japanese History and Culture In this seminar we will explore various aspects of Japan, including,
but not limited to history, religion, literature (including poetry), music, anime and manga, film, food,
political structures, and aspects of popular culture. 6 credits; HI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
ASST 284 Japanese Linguistics in Kyoto Seminar: History and Culture of Japan This course is an introduction
to several aspects of Japanese society, taking advantage of the location of the Linguistics OCS seminar in
Kyoto. It consists of readings and lectures about important events in historical and contemporary Japan,
and will include visits to sites that illuminate those events in important ways. In addition to Kyoto and
nearby places, there will be excursions to Tokyo and Hiroshima. 6 credits; HI, IS; Spring; Mike J Flynn
ASST 319 Buddhist Studies India Program: History of South Asian Buddhism This course provides students
with an introduction to the history of South Asian Buddhism. Using primary and secondary sources and
resources available to us in Bodh Gaya, we evaluate competing perspectives on the history of Buddhism
and debate significant historical and ethical questions. How did Buddhism relate to other ancient Indian
religions? What was the relationship between Buddhism and ancient Indian political, social, and economic

75
structures? How did Buddhism change during its 2000 years in India? What impact did South Asian
Buddhism have on the ancient and medieval world? What is the relationship between modern Buddhism
and ancient Buddhism? Prerequisite: Acceptance into the Buddhist Studies India Program required. 7‐8
credits; NE, IS; Fall; Arthur P McKeown
ASST 391 Buddhist Studies India Program: Independent Study Project Students spend three weeks of the
program conducting field work for the self‐designed independent study project proposed in ASST 255:
Introduction to Field Methods and Ethics. Students demonstrate ability to carry out an independent study
project that successfully incorporates appropriate field research methods and responsible approaches to
interpretation of data, and effectively demonstrates what they have learned about their research topic. The
progress of each research project is evaluated at regular intervals in relation to parameters established in
conjunction with the Faculty Director and faculty adviser. Students present their research at the end of the
ISP. Prerequisite: Acceptance into the Global Engagement Program required. 3‐4 credits; NE; Fall; Arthur P
McKeown
ASST 400 Integrative Exercise 1‐6 credit; S/NC; Fall; Asuka Sango

Astronomy
See Physics and Astronomy

Biochemistry
The biochemistry program at Carleton rests on the close cooperation between the departments of
Biology and Chemistry. Emerging as a recognized discipline early in the last century, biochemistry
has grown into a vast subject that spans several established disciplines. It serves as the link between
the fields of chemistry and biology, and even as it flourishes at the interface of these subjects, it
holds a strong position within the two traditional disciplines. Fundamentally, biochemistry seeks to
establish an understanding of biological phenomena at a molecular level.
Requirements for the Biochemistry Minor
The biochemistry minor requirements reflect the fundamental importance of the intellectual tools
and structures of biology and chemistry to the study of all issues in biochemistry, and we ask
students to get a grounding in both disciplines. It is likely that many students enrolling in the minor
will major in either biology or chemistry. To encourage breadth within the minor, no more than five
six-credit courses from a student's own major may be counted toward the minimum requirements of
the minor.
Both the biology and chemistry departments maintain vigorous weekly seminar programs, regularly
bringing to the college distinguished scientists, including many biochemists. Each minor should
make it a priority to attend relevant seminars whenever possible. At the beginning of each term,
minors will be notified of the pertinent biology and chemistry seminars held that term.
Finally, both the chemistry and biology departments regularly offer integrative exercise experiences
in biochemistry as an option for their majors. Minors who are biology or chemistry majors have the
option of furthering their pursuit of biochemistry through a biochemical topic as the basis for their
senior integrative exercise.

76

Course Requirements: 56 credits
Fundamental Coursework: 36 credits required







One introductory chemistry course chosen from CHEM 123 Principles of Chemistry I and Lab or
CHEM 128, Principles of Environmental Chemistry & Lab
BIOL 125 Genes, Evolution, and Development and Lab
BIOL 126 Energy Flow in Biological Systems and Lab
CHEM 224 Principles of Chemistry II and Lab
CHEM 233 Organic Chemistry I & Lab
CHEM 234 Organic Chemistry II & Lab

Core Coursework: 14 credits required




BIOC 301 Survey of Biochemistry
BIOC 311 Biochemistry Lab
BIOC 331 Current Topics in Biochemistry

Upper Level Course Electives: One course (6 credits) required












BIOL 310 Immunology
BIOL 332 Human Physiology
BIOL 338 Genomics and Bioinformatics
BIOL 370 Seminar: Selected Topics in Virology
BIOL 372 Seminar: Structural Biology
BIOL 382 Seminar: Molecular Biology (not offered in 2022‐23)
BIOL 385 Seminar: Microbial Pathology
CHEM 324 Chemistry and Biology of Antibiotics (not offered in 2022‐23)
CHEM 343 Chemical Thermodynamics
CHEM 350 Chemical and Biosynthesis (not offered in 2022‐23)
CHEM 360 Chemical Biology (not offered in 2022‐23)

BIOL 332, BIOL 338 and CHEM 343 only count toward the minor if taken prior to 2022-23.
The core courses BIOC 301, BIOC 311, and BIOC 331 are being offered for the first time in 202223 and replace the courses CHEM 320, CHEM 321, BIOL 380, and BIOL 381 (no longer
offered). For students in the class of 2023, CHEM 321 or BIOL 381 can substitute for BIOC 311,
and CHEM 320 or BIOL 380 can substitute for BIOC 301.
Other relevant courses
The college offers a number of related courses that would enhance the background of a
biochemistry minor. The following courses are not part of the minor, but do support the program. In
particular, we strongly encourage interested students to enroll in BIOL 240.





BIOL 234 Microbiology with Laboratory
BIOL 240 Genetics
BIOL 280 Cell Biology
CHEM 301 Chemical Kinetics Laboratory

77


PSYC 318 Psychopharmacology

Course Descriptions
BIOC 301 Survey of Biochemistry This course applies the principles of chemistry to explore the molecular
basis of biological processes. It provides students with a foundational knowledge of biochemistry, with an
emphasis on the structure and function of biological macromolecules including nucleic acids and
proteins. Topics include enzyme catalysis and kinetics, bioenergetics, and the organization and regulation
of metabolic pathways. Biology majors must also complete BIOC 311 in order for BIOC 301 to count
towards the Biology major. Prerequisite: Biology 126, Chemistry 224, Chemistry 234. 6 credits; NE, QRE;
Fall, Winter; Rou‐Jia Sung, Rachel E Horness
BIOC 311 Biochemistry Laboratory This course introduces students to fundamental biochemical laboratory
techniques important to studying protein structure and function, such as the manipulation of nucleic acids,
electrophoresis, protein purification, and functional assays. Students will apply these techniques to
scientific problems drawn from faculty research. Prerequisite: Previous or concurrent registration in BIOC
301. 2 credits; LS; Winter, Spring; Rou‐Jia Sung, Chris T Calderone
BIOC 331 Current Topics in Biochemistry An examination of one or more topics of current research interest
in biochemistry, focused on reading, interpreting, and understanding the scientific literature. Specific
topics vary from year to year but are chosen to illustrate the power of biochemical approaches to address
important scientific questions. The bulk of the course will be spent in the close reading and discussion of
recent research literature. Prerequisite: Biochemistry 301. 6 credits; NE; Spring; Chris T Calderone

Biology
Potential biology majors should select a sequence of courses that will acquaint them with a variety of
organisms, and their molecular and cellular structure, physiology, heredity, development, evolution, and
ecological interactions. Biologists pursue careers in biological research, study in the medical sciences,
teaching at the college or high school level, work in environmental sciences, or work in numerous
commercial and industrial areas.

Requirements for the Biology Major
75 credits required for the major.
1. Biology 125 and 126 (majors are required to complete both introductory courses, with a grade of
"C-" or better before taking any other courses in the department)
2. One course from each of the following groups including their laboratories:
a. Molecular and Cell Biology





BIOC 301 Survey of Biochemistry
BIOL 240 Genetics
BIOL 280 Cell Biology
BIOL 310 Immunology

b. Organismic Biology

78











BIOL 234 Microbiology (not offered in 2022‐23)
BIOL 238 Entomology (not offered in 2022‐23)
BIOL 242 Vertebrate Morphology (not offered in 2022‐23)
BIOL 252 Environmental Animal Physiology (not offered in 2022‐23)
BIOL 262 Ecological Physiology
BIOL 272 Integrative Animal Physiology
BIOL 332 Human Physiology
BIOL 342 Animal Developmental Biology (not offered in 2022‐23)
BIOL 360 Seminar: Climate Change Beneath the Waves
BIOL 386 Neurobiology (not offered in 2022‐23)

c. Ecology and Evolutionary Biology










BIOL 220 Disease Ecology and Evolution
BIOL 224 Landscape Ecology
BIOL 238 Entomology (not offered in 2022‐23)
BIOL 248 Behavioral Ecology
BIOL 321 Ecosystem Ecology (not offered in 2022‐23)
BIOL 338 Genomics and Bioinformatics
BIOL 350 Evolution
BIOL 352 Population Ecology (not offered in 2022‐23)
BIOL 355 Seminar: The Plant‐Animal Interface (not offered in 2022‐23)

3. Three electives (which may include six credits of Biology 394) from the courses listed below. If
you choose a course for an elective that offers a laboratory section, then the lab must be taken in
order for the course to count toward the major.
























BIOC 301 Survey of Biochemistry
BIOL 210 Global Change Biology
BIOL 215 Agroecology (not offered in 2022‐23)
BIOL 224 Landscape Ecology
BIOL 234 Microbiology (not offered in 2022‐23)
BIOL 238 Entomology (not offered in 2022‐23)
BIOL 240 Genetics
BIOL 242 Vertebrate Morphology (not offered in 2022‐23)
BIOL 248 Behavioral Ecology
BIOL 252 Environmental Animal Physiology (not offered in 2022‐23)
BIOL 272 Integrative Animal Physiology
BIOL 280 Cell Biology
BIOL 310 Immunology
BIOL 321 Ecosystem Ecology (not offered in 2022‐23)
BIOL 332 Human Physiology
BIOL 338 Genomics and Bioinformatics
BIOL 342 Animal Developmental Biology (not offered in 2022‐23)
BIOL 350 Evolution
BIOL 352 Population Ecology (not offered in 2022‐23)
BIOL 355 Seminar: The Plant‐Animal Interface (not offered in 2022‐23)
BIOL 356 Seminar: Topics in Developmental Biology
BIOL 358 Seminar: Evolution of Sex and Sexes (not offered in 2022‐23)
BIOL 363 Seminar: Ecomechanics

79













BIOL 365 Seminar: Topics in Neuroscience
BIOL 368 Seminar: Developmental Neurobiology
BIOL 370 Seminar: Selected Topics in Virology
BIOL 372 Seminar: Structural Biology
BIOL 374 Seminar: Grassland Ecology (not offered in 2022‐23)
BIOL 378 Seminar: The Origin and Early Evolution of Life
BIOL 379 Seminar: Behavioral Genetics
BIOL 382 Seminar: Molecular Biology (not offered in 2022‐23)
BIOL 385 Seminar: Microbial Pathology
BIOL 386 Neurobiology (not offered in 2022‐23)
NEUR 238 Neurons, Circuits and Behavior
NEUR 239 Neurons, Circuits and Behavior Lab

4. Data Interpretation: One of the three electives must be a seminar course that emphasizes data
interpretation and analysis of the primary literature. Ideally, you should complete this seminar
course prior to registering for Biology 400 (integrative exercise). A maximum of two courses may
be taken from this category.















BIOL 355 Seminar: The Plant‐Animal Interface (not offered in 2022‐23)
BIOL 356 Seminar: Topics in Developmental Biology
BIOL 358 Seminar: Evolution of Sex and Sexes (not offered in 2022‐23)
BIOL 360 Seminar: Climate Change Beneath the Waves
BIOL 363 Seminar: Ecomechanics
BIOL 365 Seminar: Topics in Neuroscience
BIOL 368 Seminar: Developmental Neurobiology
BIOL 370 Seminar: Selected Topics in Virology
BIOL 372 Seminar: Structural Biology
BIOL 374 Seminar: Grassland Ecology (not offered in 2022‐23)
BIOL 378 Seminar: The Origin and Early Evolution of Life
BIOL 379 Seminar: Behavioral Genetics
BIOL 382 Seminar: Molecular Biology (not offered in 2022‐23)
BIOL 385 Seminar: Microbial Pathology

5. Because of the close interrelationship of Biology to other STEM fields, supporting work in other
areas is necessary. The minimum requirement includes 1) Physics: two five-week courses or one
ten-week courses from 131-165 for a total of 6 credits, or Biology 244 (Biostatistics) plus one 3
credit Introductory Physics course, or Statistics 120 (formerly Mathematics 215) or Computer
Science 111; and 2) Chemistry 123 or 128; and 3) Chemistry 224 or 233. The need for additional
courses in allied sciences and mathematics will vary with the professional plans of the student.
6. Critical Reading and Analysis of Primary Literature (Biology 399).
7. Integrative Exercise (Biology 400 two terms).
Laboratory work is an integral part of most biology courses. In courses in which registration for the
laboratory is separable from the lecture portion of the course, all biology majors are required to
register concurrently for laboratory and lecture in order for these courses to count toward
requirements for the major unless otherwise noted.

80

No course taken at another school may be used to meet the requirements for the major without prior
approval of the Chair and Biology faculty. Students may request that up to six credits of biologyrelated coursework from an off-campus program be applied to the major as one upper-level biology
elective. To do this, you must discuss approval of these credits with the department chair, and
complete an Approval of Special Credit for Off-Campus Study Form.
The Introductory Sequence
The Introductory Biology sequence consists of two courses, Biology 125 and 126, both of which are
required before any further upper-level course work in Biology. The two courses can be taken in
either order. Students who received a score of 5 on the AP exam or a score of 6 or 7 on the IB exam
are exempted from Biology 125, and only need to take Biology 126 before taking upper-level
Biology courses (although some students elect to take 125 even if they are exempt). Prerequisites
for Biology 126 include Chemistry 123 or 128; or AP Chemistry score of 4 or 5; or IB score of 5, 6
or 7.
Biology Courses
BIOL 101 Human Reproduction and Sexuality The myths surrounding human reproduction and sexuality
may outweigh our collective knowledge and understanding. This course will review the basic biology of all
aspects of reproduction‐‐from genes to behavior‐‐in an attempt to better understand one of the more basic
and important processes in nature. Topics will vary widely and will be generated in part by student interest.
A sample of topics might include: hormones, PMS, fertilization, pregnancy, arousal, attraction, the
evolution of the orgasm, and the biology of sexuality. 6 credits; NE, QRE; Winter; Matt S Rand
BIOL 125 Genes, Evolution, and Development and Lab Emphasizes the role of genetic information in
biological systems. Under this theme, we cover subjects from the molecular to the population levels of
organization, including genetics, structure/function of DNA, gene expression and regulation, the changing
genetic makeup of species as they evolve, and the development of individual organisms from zygotes. The
active learning format of this course allows time in class to apply new concepts with faculty present.
Students enter Carleton from a wide variety of academic experiences and our introductory courses are
designed to provide a level playing field for students regardless of previous science background. 6 credits;
QRE, LS; Fall, Winter, Spring; Jennifer M Ross‐Wolff, Amanda K Hund, Sarah Deel, Annie L Bosacker, Stephan
G Zweifel, Mark McKone, Debby R Walser‐Kuntz, Rika E Anderson, John L Berini
BIOL 126 Energy Flow in Biological Systems and Lab Emphasizes the role of energy flow (acquiring, storing,
and using energy) in biological systems. Under this theme, we cover subjects from the molecular to the
population levels of organization, including structure/function of proteins and enzymes, transport of
molecules within biological systems, and links between organismal physiology and ecosystem function. The
active learning format of this course allows time in class to apply new concepts with faculty present.
Students enter Carleton from a wide variety of academic experiences and our introductory courses are
designed to provide a level playing field for students regardless of previous science background.
Prerequisite: Chemistry 123 or 128. 6 credits; LS, QRE; Winter, Spring; Mike T Nishizaki, Rou‐Jia Sung, David
Hougen‐Eitzman, John L Berini, Raka M Mitra, Gail D Schwieterman
BIOL 210 Global Change Biology Environmental problems are caused by a complex mix of physical,
biological, social, economic, political, and technological factors. This course explores how these
environmental problems affect life on Earth by examining the biological processes underlying natural
ecological systems and the effects of global environmental changes such as resources consumption and

81
overharvesting, land‐use change, climate warming, pollution, extinction and biodiversity loss, and invasive
species. Prerequisite: One introductory science lab course (Biology 125, 126, Chemistry 123, 128, Geology
110, 115 or 120). 6 credits; QRE, NE; Winter; Daniel Hernández
BIOL 212 Australia Program: Ecological Field Research Designed to complement and extend Biology 307.
This course emphasizes field research methodology, with emphasis on comparison on ecological
characteristics among terrestrial habitats in Australia and New Zealand. Major topics will include design and
analysis of experiments, as well as use of primary literature to inform research questions. Prerequisite:
Biology 125 and 126 and at least one upper‐level Biology course related to ecology, evolution or organismal
biology. 6 credits; NE, QRE; Not offered 2022‐23
BIOL 215 Agroecology Agriculture comprises the greatest single type of land use on the planet‐‐as such,
what happens on farms will have far‐reaching effects on all other systems on the biosphere. With world
human population growing exponentially, the search for sustainable agricultural systems is more important
than ever. This course focuses on the scientific aspects of food production, which will involve the
application of the principles of ecosystem and population ecology to agricultural systems. Topics covered
will include organic farming, biotechnology, and effects of pesticide use. Several types of local farms will be
visited‐‐large, small, organic, conventional. Prerequisite: One introductory science lab course (Biology 125,
126, Chemistry 123, 128, Geology 110, 115, 120 or 125).; Requires concurrent registration in Biology 216. 6
credits; NE, QRE; Not offered 2022‐23
BIOL 216 Agroecology Lab These lab sessions will mainly involve visits to local area farms. The visits will
provide an opportunity to examine biological processes on real farms and the environmental effects of
different farming methods. This laboratory portion of the class will include a community engagement
aspect, where class groups complete projects that provide services to farmers or community organizations.
Prerequisite: Concurrent registration in Biology 215 is required. 2 credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐23
BIOL 220 Disease Ecology and Evolution Parasites and pathogens play a central role in shaping the natural
world, from the physiology and behavior of individuals to the dynamics of populations and the structure of
ecosystems. This course will explore the ecological and evolutionary processes that shape host‐parasite
interactions. Topics include transmission of disease through host populations, the evolution of virulence,
coevolution between hosts and parasites, how disease influences communities and food webs, how
parasites shape host behavior and life history, and the ecology of newly emerging infectious
diseases. Prerequisite: Biology 125 and 126. 6 credits; NE, WR2; Winter; Amanda K Hund
BIOL 224 Landscape Ecology In the Anthropocene, there has been dramatic change in the distribution of
species and communities across the global landscape. The primary objective of this course is to introduce
the theory and practice of landscape ecology. Throughout this course, we will consider the major themes of
scale and hierarchy theory, compositional analysis, fragmentation, meta‐populations, and landscape
metrics, all within the broad context of how landscape patterns influence ecological process. Prerequisite:
Biology 125 and Biology 126 or permission of the instructor and concurrent registration in BIOL 225. 6
credits; NE, QRE; Fall; John L Berini
BIOL 225 Landscape Ecology Laboratory Laboratory component of Biology 224. Prerequisite: Requires
concurrent registration in Biology 224. 2 credits; NE; Fall; John L Berini
BIOL 234 Microbiology A study of the metabolism, genetics, structure, and function of microorganisms.
While presented in the framework of the concepts of cellular and molecular biology, the emphasis will be
on the uniqueness and diversity of the microbial world. The course integrates lecture and laboratory, and

82
will fulfill requirements of a microbiology course with lab for veterinary or pharmacy schools. Prerequisite:
Biology 125 and 126; Concurrent registration in Biology 235. 6 credits; LS, QRE; Not offered 2022‐23
BIOL 235 Microbiology Laboratory Prerequisite: Biology 125 and 126; Concurrent registration in Biology
234. 2 credits; Not offered 2022‐23
BIOL 238 Entomology Insects are one of the most successful groups of organisms on the planet, playing
major roles in all terrestrial and freshwater ecosystems. In addition, since insects are ubiquitous they affect
human endeavors on many fronts, both positively (e.g., crop pollination) and negatively (damage to crops
and transmitting disease). This class will focus on the biology of insects, including physiology, behavior, and
ecology. Many examples will highlight current environmental issues. Prerequisite: Biology 125 and 126;
Concurrent registration in Biology 239. 6 credits; QRE, NE; Not offered 2022‐23
BIOL 239 Entomology Laboratory Field and laboratory investigation of living insects. Synoptic examination
of the major orders of insects, including evolution of different groups, physiology, structure, and
identification. Field labs will focus on insect ecology and collection techniques for making a comprehensive
insect collection. Prerequisite: Concurrent registration Biology 238. 2 credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐23
BIOL 240 Genetics A study of the transmission of genetic information between generations of organisms,
and of the mechanism of expression of information within an individual organism. The main emphasis will
be on the physical and chemical basis of heredity; mutational, transmissional and functional analysis of the
genetic material, and gene expression. Prerequisite: Biology 125 and 126 or instructor permission. 6 credits;
QRE, NE; Winter, Spring; Jennifer M Ross‐Wolff, Stephan G Zweifel
BIOL 241 Genetics Laboratory Prerequisite: Biology 125 and 126 or instructor permission; Concurrent
registration in Biology 240. 2 credits; NE; Winter, Spring; Jennifer M Ross‐Wolff, Stephan G Zweifel
BIOL 242 Vertebrate Morphology Over 500 million years of evolution has produced a rich diversity of
structure and functional morphology in vertebrates. We will use comparative methods to help us
understand the various selective forces and constraints that produced the vertebrate forms living today.
Laboratory dissection of a variety of preserved vertebrates will allow us to examine how these fascinating
animals monitor and move through their environment, procure, ingest and circulate nutrients, respirate,
and reproduce. Prerequisite: Biology 125 and 126. 6 credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐23
BIOL 243 Vertebrate Morphology Laboratory 2 credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐23
BIOL 244 Biostatistics An introduction to statistical techniques commonly used in Biology. The course will
use examples from primary literature to examine the different ways that biological data are organized and
analyzed. Emphasis will be placed on how to choose the appropriate statistical techniques in different
circumstances and how to use statistical software to carry out tests. Topics covered include variable types
(categorical, parametric, and non‐parametric), analysis of variance, generalized linear models, and meta‐
analysis. There will be an opportunity for students to analyze data from their own research experiences.
Prerequisite: Biology 125 and 126 and one Biology 200 or 300 level course. 3 credits; FSR, QRE; Winter;
Mark McKone
BIOL 248 Behavioral Ecology Behavioral ecologists strive to understand the complex ways that ecological
pressures influence the evolution of behavioral strategies. It can be argued that animals face a relatively
small set of basic challenges: they must acquire food, water, and mates, and they must avoid danger. Yet
we see a rich diversity of solutions to these problems. Consider foraging behavior, for example. All animals
must acquire energy, but some filter particles out of sea water, others graze on nearly inedible grasses,

83
while still others hunt in cooperative packs. In this course we will consider such topics as foraging,
communication, sociality, and conflict. By focusing on the functions and evolutionary histories of behaviors,
we strive to better understand the puzzle of behavioral diversity. Prerequisite: Biology 125 and 126. 6
credits; NE, QRE; Winter; Annie L Bosacker
BIOL 250 Australia/New Zealand Program: Marine Ecology This course will explore the population,
community, and evolutionary ecology of marine organisms, with a focus on the Great Barrier Reef. Major
topics will include coral reef structure and function, diversity of fauna and flora, as well as impacts of
climate change and fisheries on reef ecology. Prerequisite: Biology 125 and 126 and one upper‐level Biology
course related to ecology, evolution or organismal Biology. 6 credits; NE, QRE; Not offered 2022‐23
BIOL 252 Environmental Animal Physiology This course explores the physiological adaptations animals
employ to survive in a wide variety of environments. Animals maintain physiological functions in the face of
environmental extremes in heat, cold, aridity, deep ocean pressure, salinity, and the lack of oxygen in water
or at high altitude, to name a few. An organism's ability to cope with environmental extremes has a large
impact on the geographic distribution of many species. Prerequisite: Biology 125 and 126. 6 credits; QRE,
NE; Not offered 2022‐23
BIOL 253 Environmental Animal Physiology Laboratory Concurrent registration in Biology 252 required.
Prerequisite: Concurrent registration in Biology 252; Biology 125 and Biology 126. 2 credits; NE; Not offered
2022‐23
BIOL 255 Australia Program: Learning Country, Culture and Environment in Australia In this course students
will learn about the natural history of the Australian landscape and the cultural history of the people who
have settled there. We will specifically consider the role of sustainability in Aboriginal, colonial, and modern
Australian cultures. The majority of work for this class will be reading selected works that showcase central
concepts. This reading should be completed before the program begins, and work will be evaluated through
written work. In Australia, students will learn through lectures and cultural immersion, and they will
synthesize what they learn in reflective essays. Prerequisite: Biology 125 and 126. 6 credits; NE, IS; Not
offered 2022‐23
BIOL 262 Ecological Physiology This course examines the physiological adaptations that allow species to
inhabit a wide range of environments including polar regions, deserts, high alpine, the deep sea, and wave‐
swept coastal habitats. Emphasis will be placed on understanding how organisms cope with environmental
extremes (e.g., temperature, low oxygen, pH, salinity and pressure) and in using metabolic theory to predict
the ecological impacts of climate change (e.g., global warming, ocean acidification, hypoxia). Associated
laboratory will emphasize experimentation and application of physiological concepts in living
organisms. Prerequisite: Biology 125 and 126; Concurrent registration in Biology 263 required. 6 credits; LS;
Fall; Mike T Nishizaki
BIOL 263 Ecological Physiology Laboratory Experimental approaches to study physiological responses of
living organisms to their environment. Students will conduct a semi‐independent lab project. Prerequisite:
Biology 125 and 126. Requires concurrent registration in Biology 262. 2 credits; NE; Fall; Mike T Nishizaki
BIOL 272 Integrative Animal Physiology This course explores biological functions from the biochemical level
to the level of the whole organism. We will start with the regulatory systems exploring the function of
neural and endocrine mechanisms. We will discuss the actions of a variety of toxins as adaptive
components of venoms and pharmaceutical tools in human health research. Other topics include: muscle
physiology, exercise and behavior; blood pressure regulation; salt and water balance in organisms from

84
different environments; comparative reproduction, including human reproductive development and
sexuality. Prerequisite: Biology 125 and 126. 6 credits; NE, QRE; Fall; Matt S Rand
BIOL 273 Integrative Animal Physiology Laboratory Concurrent registration in Biology 272 required.
Prerequisite: Concurrent registration in Biology 272; Biology 125 and 126. 2 credits; NE; Fall; Matt S Rand
BIOL 280 Cell Biology An examination of the structures and processes that underlie the life of cells, both
prokaryotic and eukaryotic. Topics to be covered include methodologies used to study cells; organelles,
membranes and other cellular components; protein targeting within the cell; and cellular communication
and division. Prerequisite: Biology 125 and 126 and concurrent registration in Biology 281. 6 credits; QRE,
NE; Fall; Raka M Mitra
BIOL 281 Cell Biology Laboratory The focus of the laboratory will be on current techniques used to study
cellular structure and function. Prerequisite: Concurrent registration in Biology 280; Biology 125 and 126. 2
credits; NE; Fall; Raka M Mitra
BIOL 303 Reflective Learning and ePortfolio Development for Biologists In this course you will synthesize
your biology‐related experiences, reflect on your strengths and goals, and design an ePortfolio. Developing
an ePortfolio provides the opportunity to present yourself visually in a digital format and to be forward‐
looking as you consider your life post‐Carleton. In addition to implementing the design elements of an
effective digital resume, you will explore the primary literature to situate your work within the field of
biology and read key research papers that led to the classification of the ePortfolio as a high impact
practice. This class will be hands‐on and interactive. Prerequisite: Junior or Senior Biology Major. 3 credits;
NE; Not offered 2022‐23
BIOL 310 Immunology This course will examine the role of the immune system in defense, allergic
reactions, and autoimmunity. Topics to be covered include the structure and function of antibodies,
cytokines, the role of the major histocompatibility complex in antigen presentation, cellular immunity,
immunodeficiencies, and current techniques used to study immune responses. Prerequisite: Biology 125
and 126 and either Biology 240 or 280. 6 credits; QRE, NE; Winter; Debby R Walser‐Kuntz
BIOL 311 Immunology Laboratory In this laboratory course, students will explore experimental design,
immunology‐related techniques, and the communication of scientific findings. Prerequisite: Biology 125
and 126 and Biology 240 or 280 and Biology 310. 2 credits; NE; Spring; Debby R Walser‐Kuntz
BIOL 321 Ecosystem Ecology Ecosystem ecology involves the study of energy and material flow through
systems, including both the biotic (animals, plants, microbes) and abiotic (soil, water, atmosphere)
components. Topics include the major elemental cycles (carbon, nitrogen, phosphorous), patterns of
energy flow, and the controls of these fluxes for different ecosystems. Current environmental issues are
emphasized as case studies, including climate change, land use change, human alterations of nutrient
cycles, and biodiversity effects on ecosystems. Prerequisite: one 200 level course in Biology or Geology 230,
258, 285 or Environmental Studies 244, 254,260, 265, 288; Biology 126. 6 credits; WR2, QRE, NE; Not
offered 2022‐23
BIOL 322 Ecosystem Ecology Laboratory Prerequisite: Requires concurrent registration in Biology 321. 2
credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐23
BIOL 332 Human Physiology Human Physiology seeks to understand the fundamental mechanisms
responsible for the diverse functions of the body. Course topics include the function and regulation of the
various physiological systems (nervous, circulatory, endocrine, excretory, respiratory, digestive, etc.),

85
biochemistry, cellular physiology, homeostasis and acid‐base chemistry. The study of human physiology
provides the principal groundwork for internal medicine, pharmacology, and other related health fields. The
laboratory includes a variety of experiments focusing on the function and regulation of the human body.
Prerequisite: Biology 125 and 126; Concurrent registration in Biology 333. 6 credits; NE, QRE; Winter;
Fernan Jaramillo
BIOL 333 Human Physiology Laboratory Prerequisite: Concurrent registration in Biology 332; Biology 125
and 126. 2 credits; NE; Winter; Fernan Jaramillo
BIOL 338 Genomics and Bioinformatics The advent of next‐generation sequencing technology has
revolutionized biology, enabling transformative breakthroughs in fields ranging from agriculture to
conservation to medicine. In this course, students will gain experience with the computational and
bioinformatics tools needed to analyze “big data,” including sequence searching and alignment, assembly,
gene calling and annotation. Students will learn to ask and answer their own scientific questions using
sequence data, and to critically assess the conclusions of other genomics and bioinformatics studies. No
prior computer programming experience is required. Associated laboratory will focus on wet lab methods
for DNA/RNA extraction and preparation as well as computational analysis. Prerequisite: Biology 125 and
126 and one of these upper level courses: Biology 240, Biology 321 or Biology 350; concurrent registration
in Biology 339. 6 credits; LS, QRE; Fall; Rika E Anderson
BIOL 339 Genomics and Bioinformatics Laboratory Prerequisite: Concurrent registration in Biology 338. 2
credits; NE; Fall; Rika E Anderson
BIOL 342 Animal Developmental Biology An analysis of animal development from fertilization to the
establishment of the adult body form. Lectures and discussions will examine the key processes of animal
embryogenesis, as well as the molecular and cellular mechanisms that control these developmental
processes. Prerequisite: Biology 125 and 126, and Biology 240 or 280. 6 credits; QRE, NE; Not offered 2022‐
23
BIOL 343 Animal Developmental Biology Laboratory Laboratory will introduce descriptive and experimental
embryological techniques using a variety of model organisms. Prerequisite: Biology 125 and 126, and
Biology 240 or 280; Concurrent registration in Biology 342. 2 credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐23
BIOL 350 Evolution Principles and history of evolutionary change in wild populations, with consideration of
both microevolutionary and macroevolutionary time scales. Topics covered include causes of change in
gene frequency, the nature of adaptation, constraints on evolutionary change, the evolution of genes and
proteins, rates of speciation and extinction, and the major events in evolutionary history. Prerequisite:
Biology 125 and 126. 6 credits; QRE, NE; Fall; Mark McKone
BIOL 352 Population Ecology An investigation of the properties of populations and communities. Topics
include population growth and regulation, life tables, interspecific and intraspecific competition, predation,
parasitism, mutualism, the nature of communities, and biogeography. Prerequisite: Biology 125 and 126,
and Mathematics 111 or other previous calculus course. Recommended course: Statistics 120 (formerly
Mathematics 215) or equivalent exposure to statistical analysis; concurrent registration in Biology 353. 6
credits; QRE, NE; Not offered 2022‐23
BIOL 353 Population Ecology Laboratory Prerequisite: Biology 125 & 126, and Mathematics 111 or other
previous calculus course. Recommended course: Statistics 120 (formerly Mathematics 215) or equivalent
exposure to statistical analysis; Concurrent registration in Biology 352. 2 credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐23

86
BIOL 354 Human Cutaneous Biology The course will cover the cellular and molecular biology of human skin
in its normal and diseased states as it relates to a clinical presentation. Clinical dermatology and pathology
will also be reviewed. The course style will be patterned along the lines as if it were a medical school
course. Additionally, students will be introduced to many aspects of successfully negotiating medical school
including introductions and possible field trips to the Mayo Clinic Medical School and/or University of
Minnesota Medical School(s). Prerequisite: Chemistry 233 and two upper division Biology courses (200 or
300‐level) and instructor's permission required. 3 credits; S/CR/NC; NE; Spring; Charles E Crutchfield
BIOL 355 Seminar: The Plant‐Animal Interface The primary objective of this seminar is to gain a better
understanding of “the plant‐animal interface,” with a specific focus on the interactions between plants and
vertebrate herbivores. Topics covered include 1) the range of influences that the abiotic environment has
on plants as a source of energy and nutrition for vertebrates; 2) how animals respond to heterogeneity in
the plant communities with a specific focus on plant chemistry (i.e., nutritional indices and defensive
chemistry); and 3) how heterogeneity in plant chemistry influences animal demographics and overall
biological diversity. Prerequisite: Biology 125, Biology 126 and a 200‐level course in Biology. 6 credits; NE;
Not offered 2022‐23
BIOL 356 Seminar: Topics in Developmental Biology The development of an embryo from a single cell to a
complex body requires the coordinated efforts of a growing number of cells and cell types. In this seminar
course, we will use primary literature to explore recent advances in our understanding of the cellular
processes such as intercellular signaling, migration, proliferation, and differentiation that make
development possible. Additionally, we will consider how these developmental cellular processes, when
disrupted, lead to cancer and other diseases. Priority will be given to juniors and seniors who have not
already taken a seminar course. Prerequisite: Biology 240, Biology 280 or Biology 342. 6 credits; NE, QRE;
Spring; Jennifer M Ross‐Wolff
BIOL 358 Seminar: Evolution of Sex and Sexes The origin and maintenance of sexual reproduction remains a
central enigma in evolutionary biology. This seminar course will explore contemporary primary literature
that addresses a variety of evolutionary questions about the nature of sex and the sexes. Why is sexual
reproduction usually favored over asexual alternatives? Why are there no more than two sexes? What
determines the characteristics of females and males within diverse species? How did sex chromosomes
evolve and why do some species lack them? Prerequisite: Biology 240 or Biology 350. 6 credits; NE, QRE;
Not offered 2022‐23
BIOL 360 Seminar: Climate Change Beneath the Waves Marine climate change comprises rising
temperatures, increases in the frequency and severity of hypoxia, and ocean acidification. Together, these
environmental variables can have profound effects on marine life. Or not. This course will focus upon the
physiological capacities of various marine species to respond to changes in the ocean's chemical and
physical properties. Through discussions of the primary literature, we will explore the physiological
mechanisms that will mark species as winners or losers of the anthropocene. Prerequisite: Biology 125 and
126 and one additional 200 or 300 level Biology course or instructor consent. 6 credits; NE, QRE; Fall; Gail D
Schwieterman
BIOL 363 Seminar: Ecomechanics All organisms, from Common loons to Redwood trees to Basking sharks
spend much of their lives bumping up against forces associated with the non‐biological world. The manner
in which ecological challenges are solved (e.g., moving around vs. staying put, finding food, avoiding
predators) is often related to an individual’s biomechanical design. This class will challenge students to view
their physical surroundings from the perspective of an organism. How do mussels feed in a fast stream vs.
stagnant pond? Why do healthy trees uproot rather than break in half? How can a sea urchin with no eyes

87
“see”? We will use primary scientific literature to examine the physical principles that underlie fundamental
ecological processes. Prerequisite: Biology 125 and 126 and one additional 200 or 300 level Biology course
or instructor permission. 6 credits; NE, QRE; Spring; Mike T Nishizaki
BIOL 365 Seminar: Topics in Neuroscience We will focus on recent advances in neuroscience. All areas of
neuroscience (cellular/molecular, developmental, systems, cognitive, and disease) will be considered.
Classical or foundational papers will be used to provide background. Prerequisite: Biology 125 and 126. 6
credits; NE, QRE; Fall; Fernan Jaramillo
BIOL 368 Seminar: Developmental Neurobiology An examination of the cellular and molecular mechanisms
underlying development of the nervous system. We will survey recent studies of a variety of model
organisms to explore key steps in neuronal development including neural induction, patterning,
specification of neuronal identity, axonal guidance, synapse formation, cell death and regeneration.
Prerequisite: Biology 240 or Biology 280. 6 credits; QRE, NE; Winter; Eric D Hoopfer
BIOL 370 Seminar: Selected Topics in Virology An examination of selected animal viruses. The course will
focus on the most recent developments in HIV‐related research, including implications for HIV‐treatment
and vaccines and the impact of viral infection on the immune system of the host. In addition to studying the
structure and replication of particular viruses we will also discuss the current laboratory techniques used in
viral research. Prerequisite: Biology 240 or 280. 6 credits; NE, QRE; Fall; Debby R Walser‐Kuntz
BIOL 372 Seminar: Structural Biology The ability to visualize macromolecules at atomic detail has
significantly advanced our understanding of macromolecular structure and function. This course will
provide an overview of fundamental experimental methodologies underlying structure determination,
followed by primary literature‐based discussions in which students will present and critically discuss classic
foundational papers as well as examples from the current literature that have advanced our understanding
of macromolecule structure and function. Prerequisite: Biology 125 and 126; and either Biology 280,
Biology 380, Biochemistry 301 or Chemistry 320. 6 credits; NE, QRE; Spring; Rou‐Jia Sung
BIOL 374 Seminar: Grassland Ecology Grassland ecosystems cover one third of the Earth's surface and occur
on every continent except Antarctica. Grasslands provide habitat for millions of species, play a major role in
global carbon and nutrient cycles, and are the primary source of agricultural land, making them an
important ecosystem both ecologically and economically. This course will utilize scientific literature to
explore the environmental and biological characteristics of the world's grasslands from population
dynamics to ecosystem processes. Topics include competition and succession, plant‐animal interactions,
carbon and nutrient cycling, the role of disturbances such as fire and land use change, and grassland
management and restoration. Prerequisite: Biology 125 and 126, and one of Biology 210, 238, 248, 321 or
352 and instructor permission. 6 credits; WR2, QRE, NE; Not offered 2022‐23
BIOL 378 Seminar: The Origin and Early Evolution of Life The Earth formed four and a half billion years ago.
Evidence suggests that within 700 million years, life had gained a foothold on this planet. We will delve into
the primary literature to explore fundamental questions about the origin and evolution of life: How did life
arise from non‐life on the dynamic young Earth? Where on Earth did life begin? Did life only arise once?
What did the first living organisms look like? What was the nature of our last universal common ancestor?
How did life alter the planet on which it arose? Could life originate elsewhere in the cosmos? Prerequisite:
Biology 125 and 126 and one additional 200‐ or 300‐level Biology course, or permission of the instructor. 6
credits; NE, QRE; Winter; Rika E Anderson
BIOL 379 Seminar: Behavioral Genetics Recent advances in molecular biology have allowed researchers to
test specific hypotheses concerning the genetic control of behavior. This course will examine information

88
derived from various animal model systems, including humans, using a variety of techniques such as
classical genetics, genome databases, transgenics, and behavioral neurobiology. Prerequisite: Biology 240. 6
credits; NE, QRE; Winter; Matt S Rand, Stephan G Zweifel
BIOL 382 Seminar: Molecular Biology This seminar will explore the molecular underpinnings of biological
systems. The main emphasis will be on the mechanisms of DNA replication and recombination,
chromosome stability, DNA mutation and repair, the regulation of gene expression, and emerging
biotechnologies such as CRISPR‐cas. Throughout, we will consider how the molecular details we discuss
contribute to the passage and propagation of biological information. Prerequisite: Biology 240. 6 credits;
NE; Not offered 2022‐23
BIOL 385 Seminar: Microbial Pathology Microbes are the most abundant organisms on earth, and microbial
pathogens have caused human and plant disease epidemics worldwide. This course will focus upon the
pathogenic strategy of a variety of well‐studied microbes in order to illustrate our understanding of the
molecular and cellular nature of microbial disease. We will analyze current and seminal papers in the
primary literature focusing on mechanisms employed by microbes to attack hosts. Prerequisite: Biology 125
and 126 and either Biology 240 or 280. 6 credits; QRE, NE; Winter; Raka M Mitra
BIOL 386 Neurobiology An analysis of the biology of neurons and the nervous system. Topics include the
molecular basis of electrical excitability in neurons, synaptic transmission and plasticity, motor control,
mechanisms of sensation, and construction and modification of neural circuits. Prerequisite: Biology 125
and 126. 6 credits; QRE, NE; Not offered 2022‐23
BIOL 387 Neurobiology Laboratory Prerequisite: Concurrent registration in Biology 386; Biology 125 and
126. 2 credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐23
BIOL 395 Research Experience Seminar in Biology This seminar course is intended for students who have
completed a summer research project or internship in the biological sciences. The intent of the course is to
provide students with the opportunity to discuss their research experience, learn from the experiences of
other members of the class, read relevant primary literature, and prepare a poster for a student research
symposium. Prerequisite: Biology 125 and 126. 3 credits; S/CR/NC; NE, QRE; Fall; Sarah Deel
BIOL 399 Critical Reading and Analysis of Primary Literature Guided instruction in reading and
interpretation of contemporary primary literature in Biology. Prerequisite: Biology 125, 126 and 3‐upper‐
level Biology courses; concurrent registration in Biology 400. 3 credits; S/CR/NC; NE; Fall, Winter; Daniel
Hernández, John L Berini, Mark McKone, Matt S Rand, Fernan Jaramillo, Debby R Walser‐Kuntz, Mike T
Nishizaki, Raka M Mitra, Rika E Anderson, Stephan G Zweifel
BIOL 400 Integrative Exercise Preparation and submission of the written portion of the Integrative Exercise.
Continuing course (fall or winter). Oral examination, evaluation of the Integrative Exercise, and
participation in visiting speakers seminars (spring). 1 credit; S/NC; Fall, Winter, Spring; Daniel Hernández,
Jennifer M Ross‐Wolff

Chemistry
Chemistry provides the connection between molecular concepts and the complex systems found in
nature. Chemistry courses stress the understanding of chemical principles, as well as the
experimental basis of the science. The curriculum provides a strong foundation for graduate work in
chemistry, biochemistry, and other chemistry-related areas, for positions in industry, for high school

89

teaching, and for studies in the medical and health sciences. The department is on the list of those
approved by the American Chemical Society (ACS). Students may choose to pursue an ACS
certified degree. For more information about ACS certification refer to the Professional preparation
section of this catalog. Detailed course requirements for certification can be found at http://apps.
carleton.edu/curricular/chem/curriculum.
Prospective chemistry majors should begin their study of mathematics, physics and chemistry in the
first year. Majors are encouraged to participate in summer or fall term scientific research programs
off campus or in the Chemistry Department Summer Research Program at Carleton.
The Introductory Courses
Most first-year students will take Chemistry 123, Principles of Chemistry or Chemistry 128,
Principles of Environmental Chemistry. Both are one-term courses designed for students who have
had a good high school chemistry preparation. Although taught from slightly different perspectives,
all sections of Chemistry 123 or Chemistry 128 will cover the fundamental topics that prepare
students for further work in chemistry, biology, geology, or medicine. Note that Chemistry 128 is
not offered every year. In the winter term we also offer a section of Chemistry 123 with problem
solving. This smaller section will have additional class meetings for problem solving and review
and is appropriate for students who have had a high school chemistry course but want more
interaction with the instructor as they begin the study of college-level chemistry.
Students who have not had a high school chemistry course should take Chemistry 122, An
Introduction to Chemistry, which is designed to prepare students with little or no prior work in
chemistry for further study in the discipline. This course also includes class sessions with problem
solving and review.
Students who had chemistry in high school but do not have placement (AP or IB), and are planning
to take Chemistry 123 or 128 must take the self-administered chemistry placement evaluation,
available on the chemistry department home page. This evaluation covers topics dealing with
simple formulas, equations, stoichiometry, gas laws, and the properties of solutions. It also includes
a list of topics for you to review before you take the placement exam. More information can be
found at https://apps.carleton.edu/chemistry-placement/
Requirements for the Chemistry Major
Chemistry 123 or 128, 224, 233, 234, 301, 343. One of 344 or 330. One of the following: 320, 324,
348, 350, 351, 353, 354, 358, 359, 361, 362, 363; and two of the following lab courses: 302, 306,
321, 331, 338, 349, 352, 355, 364; Physics: two three-credit courses or one six-credit course from
courses 131-165. Mathematics: 120 or 211. One additional 200-level physics course is strongly
recommended (Physics 228, 235). Chemistry 400 is required of all majors.
Major under Combined Plan in Engineering
In addition to completing the requirements for the chemistry major listed above, the student should
also take the following courses required for admission to the engineering schools: Physics 165 or
228, Mathematics 241, and Computer Science 111. At the discretion of the department, one

90

advanced course may be waived in some instances to allow the student more latitude in selection of
courses.
Chemistry Courses
CHEM 113 Concepts of Chemistry and Lab A one‐term chemistry course designed for non‐science majors. In
this course we examine what gives rise to three‐dimensional shapes of molecules and we explore how the
structure and composition of molecules gives rise to chemical reactivity. Our goal is to understand readily
observable phenomena (e.g. removal of grease by soap, storage of toxins in fat tissues, cancer, viruses,
etc.). Topics include those of current global interest such as anthropogenic forces on the environment and
energy producing technologies. The course includes one four‐hour lab per week. 6 credits; LS, QRE; Not
offered 2022‐23
CHEM 122 An Introduction to Chemistry An introduction to the fundamentals of chemistry to prepare
students to enter subsequent chemistry courses (Chemistry 123 or 128). Atoms and molecules,
stoichiometry, and gases will be covered in the course. Although learning through discovery‐based
processes, small groups, and short laboratory experimentation will occur, this is not a lab course and does
not fulfill the requirements for medical school. This course assumes competence with simple algebra, but
no prior chemistry experience. Prerequisite: Students with high school chemistry should probably take
Chemistry 123 or 128. (Determined by the self‐administered Chemistry Placement Evaluation, Chemistry
Home Page). 6 credits; QRE, NE; Fall; Kate A Sammons
CHEM 123 Principles of Chemistry I and Lab An introduction to chemistry for students who have strong high
school preparation in chemistry or who have taken Chemistry 122. Topics include the electronic structure
of atoms, periodicity, molecular geometry, thermodynamics, bonding, equilibrium, reaction kinetics, and
acids and bases. Each offering will also focus on a special topic(s) selected by the instructor. Students
cannot receive credit for both Chemistry 123 and 128. Prerequisite: Chemistry 122 or placement via
Chemistry Placement Exam (see Chemistry Department webpage). 6 credits; LS, QRE; Fall, Winter, Spring;
Rachel E Horness, Chris T Calderone
CHEM 123 Principles of Chemistry I With Problem Solving and Lab An introduction to chemistry for students
who have strong high school preparation in chemistry or who have taken Chemistry 122. Topics include the
electronic structure of atoms, periodicity, molecular geometry, thermodynamics, bonding, equilibrium,
reaction kinetics, and acids and bases. Each offering will also focus on a special topic(s) selected by the
instructor. Students cannot receive credit for both Chemistry 123 and 128. This section of Chemistry with
problem solving is periodically offered for students who wish to further develop their general analytical and
critical thinking skills. This smaller section will have additional class meetings for problem solving and
review. Chemistry 123 with problem solving is appropriate for students who would like to have more
scheduled time to work with a faculty member on developing their scientific reasoning skills and
understanding of the foundations of chemistry. Prerequisite: Chemistry 122 or placement via Chemistry
Placement Exam (see Chemistry Department webpage). 6 credits; LS, QRE; Winter; Daniela L Kohen
CHEM 128 Principles of Environmental Chemistry and Lab The core topics of chemistry (i.e.
thermodynamics, kinetics, equilibrium, and bonding) are central to understanding major environmental
topics such as greenhouse warming, ozone depletion, acid‐rain deposition, and general chemical
contamination in air, water, and soil. These topics and the chemical principles behind them are addressed
through an emphasis on the earth's atmosphere. One four‐hour laboratory per week. Because this course
covers the major topics of Chemistry 123 (but with an environmental emphasis), students cannot receive

91
credit for both Chemistry 123 and 128. Prerequisite: Chemistry 122 or placement via Chemistry Placement
Exam (see Chemistry Department webpage). 6 credits; LS, QRE; Spring; Will Hollingsworth
CHEM 224 Principles of Chemistry II and Lab A more advanced study of several core introductory chemistry
principles. This course is suitable for students with advanced placement in chemistry or students who have
completed Chemistry 123 or 128. Topics include coordination chemistry, advanced bonding models,
spectroscopy, advanced acid/base and redox equilibria, and electrochemistry. The topics will be taught
from varying perspectives using examples from biochemistry, the environment, energy, or materials
chemistry. The lab will focus on developing computational, quantitative, and synthetic skills and will
prepare students for more advanced laboratory work in chemistry. Prerequisite: Chemistry 123 or
Chemistry 128. 6 credits; LS, QRE; Fall, Winter, Spring; Steven M Drew, Deborah S Gross
CHEM 233 Organic Chemistry I and Lab Theoretical aspects of carbon chemistry are examined with
reference to structure‐reactivity relationships, functional groups, stereochemistry, reaction mechanisms
and spectroscopy. Laboratory work concentrates on modern techniques of organic chemistry, inquiry‐based
projects, and spectroscopic analysis. One laboratory per week. Prerequisite: Chemistry 123 or 128. 6
credits; LS, QRE; Fall, Winter; David G Alberg, Joe Chihade, Kate A Sammons
CHEM 234 Organic Chemistry II and Lab The chemistry of functional groups is continued from Chemistry
233, and is extended to the multifunctional compounds found in nature, in particular carbohydrates and
proteins. The laboratory focuses upon inquiry‐based projects and spectroscopic analysis. One laboratory
per week. Prerequisite: Chemistry 233. 6 credits; LS, QRE; Winter, Spring; Kate A Sammons
CHEM 259 Molecular Visualizations Students will learn to use molecular visualization tools to examine 3D
molecular structures and create visual images. Each student will create and perfect one visualization
designed to guide others through a structurally significant concept. We will primarily use the web‐based
tool JSmol and will access the Cambridge Crystallographic Data Base as well as the Protein Data Base. Guest
lectures will be given by Rou‐Jia Sung (Biology) and Joe Chihade (Chemistry) to highlight other visualization
techniques. Prerequisite: Chemistry 234 or Biology 126. 2 credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐23
CHEM 289 Climate & Health: From Science to Practice in Ethiopia This course is the second part of a two‐
term course sequence beginning with ENTS 289. This course will start with a multi‐week trip to Ethiopia.
While there, we will carry out a research program to assess the impact of cooking technologies on air
quality in peoples’ homes, investigate the connections between regional and national environmental
impacts and individual choices, and meet with national and international organizations working on these
issues. We will work in both urban Addis Ababa and a rural area, Wolkite, to explore both types of settings.
Back on campus during winter term, we will reflect on our experiences, analyze data, prepare and make
public presentations, and propose appropriate follow‐up projects. Prerequisite: Enrollment in ENTS 289 the
term before. 6 credits; NE, QRE; Winter; Deborah S Gross, Tsegaye H Nega
CHEM 301 Chemical Kinetics Laboratory A mixed class/lab course with one four hour laboratory per week
and weekly discussion/problem sessions. In class, the principles of kinetics will be developed with a
mechanistic focus. In lab, experimental design and extensive independent project work will be emphasized.
Prerequisite: Chemistry 224 and 233 and Mathematics 120. 3 credits; QRE, NE, WR2; Fall; Trish A Ferrett,
Chris T Calderone
CHEM 302 Quantum Spectroscopy Laboratory This lab course emphasizes spectroscopic studies relevant to
quantum chemistry, including experiments utilizing UV‐VIS, infrared absorption spectroscopy, and visible
emission spectroscopy. Corequisite: Chemistry 344. Prerequisite: Concurrent registration in Chemistry 344.
2 credits; QRE, NE; Winter; Trish A Ferrett

92
CHEM 306 Spectrometric Characterization of Chemical Compounds This combined lecture and lab course
teaches students how to use modern spectrometric techniques for the structural characterization of
molecules. Lectures will cover topics and problems in the theory and practical applications associated with
GC‐Mass Spectrometry, ESI‐Mass Spectrometry, Infrared, and Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy
(1H, 13C, and 2D experiments). Students will apply all of these techniques in the laboratory for the
structural characterization of known and unknown molecules. Prerequisite: Chemistry 234 or instructor
permission. 2 credits; QRE, NE; Not offered 2022‐23
CHEM 324 Chemistry and Biology of Antibiotics This course will survey the mechanisms of antibiotic activity
from a biochemical perspective, covering the major classes of antibiotics along with their respective
biological targets using a combination of lecture and discussion of recent literature. We will also explore
strategies for antibiotic discovery including combinatorial and rational approaches, as well as the molecular
origins of the current crisis in antibiotic resistance. Prerequisite: Chemistry 234. 6 credits; NE, QRE; Not
offered 2022‐23
CHEM 330 Instrumental Chemical Analysis This course covers the basic principles of quantitative
instrumental chemical analysis. Course topics include chromatography, electroanalytical chemistry,
analytical spectroscopy, and mass spectrometry. The background needed to understand the theory and
application of these instrumental techniques will be covered. In addition, students will have the
opportunity to explore current research in the field of analytical chemistry through the reading and
presentation of articles from the primary literature. Prerequisite: Chemistry 224 and Chemistry 233;
Concurrent registration in Chemistry 331. 6 credits; NE, QRE; Winter; Steven M Drew
CHEM 331 Instrumental Chemical Analysis Laboratory This laboratory provides students with experience in
using instrumental methods for quantitative chemical analysis. Laboratory work consists of several assigned
experiments that use instrumental techniques such as liquid and gas chromatography, UV
spectrophotometry and fluorometry, mass spectrometry, and voltammetry. This laboratory concludes with
an instrumental analysis project that is researched and designed by student groups. Prerequisite:
Concurrent registration in Chemistry 330; Chemistry 224 and 233. 2 credits; NE, QRE; Winter; Steven M
Drew
CHEM 338 Computer‐Assisted Experimentation for Chemists This laboratory introduces students to the
general components that make up an instrument used for chemical analysis. These components include
transducers, analog and digital electronic components, data transmission hardware, computers, and
appropriate software. The specific topics to be covered are ion selective electrodes, fluorometry, analog
electronics, basic data acquisition principles, serial data communication, Arduino and LabVIEW
programming. Prerequisite: Chemistry 224. 2 credits; LS; Fall; Steven M Drew
CHEM 343 Chemical Thermodynamics The major topic is chemical thermodynamics, including the First and
Second Laws, the conditions for spontaneous change, thermochemistry, and chemical equilibrium. To
showcase how chemists utilize energy concepts to solve problems, thermodynamics will be regularly
applied to a number of real‐world examples and scientific problems. Prerequisite: Chemistry 123 or 128,
Mathematics 120 or 211 and six credits from Physics courses number 131 to 165. 6 credits; NE, QRE; Fall;
Will Hollingsworth
CHEM 344 Quantum Chemistry This course introduces quantum mechanics with an emphasis on chemical
and spectroscopic applications. The focus will be on atomic and molecular quantum behavior involving
electrons, rotations, and vibrations. The objective is to develop both a deeper understanding of bonding as
well as an appreciation of how spectroscopy provides insight into the microscopic world of molecules.

93
Prerequisite: Chemistry 123 or 128, Mathematics 120 or 211 and six credits from Physics 131 to 165. 6
credits; NE, QRE; Winter; Trish A Ferrett
CHEM 348 Introduction to Computational Chemistry This class will introduce students to computational
chemistry with a focus on simulations in chemistry and biology. This course will include hands‐on
experience in running classical molecular dynamics and quantum chemistry programs, an introduction to
methods to simulate large systems, and demonstrations of the use of more sophisticated software to
simulate chemical and biological processes. It will also include a survey of the current literature in this area,
as well as lecture time in which the background necessary to appreciate this growing area of chemistry will
be provided. Prerequisite: Chemistry 343 and 344 or consent of the instructor; Concurrent registration in
Chemistry 349. 6 credits; NE, QRE; Spring; Daniela L Kohen
CHEM 349 Computational Chemistry Laboratory Credit for the laboratory portion of Chemistry 348.
Prerequisite: Concurrent registration in Chemistry 348. 2 credits; NE, QRE; Spring; Daniela L Kohen
CHEM 350 Chemical and Biosynthesis This seminar course considers nature's biosynthetic pathways in
conjunction with how organic chemists design the chemical synthesis of complex organic molecules.
Important metabolic pathways for biochemical syntheses, as well as the methodology of chemical
synthesis, will form the focus of the course. Prerequisite: Chemistry 234. 6 credits; NE, QRE; Not offered
2022‐23
CHEM 351 Inorganic Chemistry Symmetry, molecular orbital theory and ligand field theory will provide a
framework to explore the bonding, magnetism and spectroscopic properties of coordination complexes.
Topics in reactivity (hard and soft acids and bases), bioinorganic chemistry, reaction mechanisms, and
organometallic chemistry, will also be introduced. Prerequisite: Chemistry 224 and 234. 6 credits; NE, QRE;
Spring; Matt T Whited
CHEM 352 Laboratory in Advanced Inorganic Chemistry Synthesis, purification and spectroscopic
characterization of transition‐metal complexes with an emphasis on methods for preparing and handling
air‐sensitive compounds. One laboratory per week. Prerequisite: Concurrent or previous registation in
Chemistry 351. 2 credits; QRE, NE; Spring; Matt T Whited
CHEM 358 Organometallic Chemistry This course covers the bonding and reactivity of organometallic
complexes in the context of their applications to industrial catalysis, the synthesis of complex organic
molecules, and energy science. We will use simple yet powerful tools such as the eighteen‐electron rule
and isoelectronic arguments to rationalize and predict observed reactivity, and current literature will be
extensively utilized. Prerequisite: Chemistry 234. 6 credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐23
CHEM 360 Chemical Biology Chemical biology is a burgeoning field at the intersection of chemistry and
biology that involves the use of chemical tools and reactions to manipulate existing and even engineer
completely new biological systems. This seminar course will focus on current literature to explore recent
developments in this area, with topics including cell‐surface engineering, chemical evolution, and synthetic
biology. Prerequisite: Chemistry 234 and Biology 125 or 126. 6 credits; NE, QRE; Not offered 2022‐23
CHEM 361 Materials Chemistry Materials chemistry seeks to understand condensed matter through the
study of its structural, electronic, and macroscopic properties with an eye on practical applications.
Therefore, the study of matter from a materials perspective requires a multidisciplinary approach involving
chemistry, physics, engineering, and technology. Some topics to be covered include crystalline structure, X‐
ray diffraction, band theory, conductivity, magnetic and optical properties, the effect of size on materials
properties, and soft materials. Current research in materials chemistry will be explored through group

94
presentation and discussion of primary literature papers. Prerequisite: Chemistry 224 and Chemistry 234 or
instructor permission. 6 credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐23
CHEM 362 Chemistry at the Nanoscale This discussion‐based seminar involves critical examination of
research literature authored by prominent investigators in the interdisciplinary field of nanochemistry.
Learning will draw upon the multiple disciplines of chemistry (physical, analytical, inorganic, and organic),
physics, and biology. Includes a focus on the integrative themes of design, size, shape, surface, self‐
assembly, and defects. Novel and emerging applications in technology, biology, and medicine will be
explored. Prerequisite: Chemistry 343 or 344 and 1‐300 level Chemistry course. Any of these courses can be
taken concurrently. 6 credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐23
CHEM 363 Materials Chemistry for a Sustainable Energy Economy Chemistry is playing a central role in the
development of a renewable energy economy. This class will introduce greenhouse gases and atmospheric
chemistry as they relate to climate change, followed by discussions of energy utilization, production,
transport, and storage. Example chemistries will include electrochemical and solar‐driven processes for
producing renewable fuels, in particular hydrogen; gas storage using nanoporous materials such as Metal‐
Organic Frameworks and metal hydrides; carbon‐neutral processes for producing critical commodities such
as ammonia; and CO2 capture. The interactions between science and government policies will be
considered as well. Prerequisite: Chemistry 224. 6 credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐23
CHEM 371 Chemistry and Society ‐ Impact and Legacy Science is a human endeavor. Societal context has
thus shaped the questions chemists have asked, who benefits from or is harmed by the technological
advancements chemists discover, and who has participated in or been excluded from the chemical
enterprise. With the goal of encouraging open minded and self‐critical thinking about the discipline and its
practice, we will work collaboratively to explore a range of case studies, including the origin of chemical
nomenclature, disparate environmental impacts, and the design of pharmaceutical clinical trials, in which
chemistry intersects with, and sometimes reinforces, structural racism and other inequalities. Prerequisite:
Chemistry 224 and 233. 3 credits; NE; Fall; Daniela L Kohen
CHEM 394 Student‐Faculty Research Independent and group projects related to faculty research programs,
supervised by faculty in all areas of chemistry and typically associated with summer or winter‐break
research projects. Activities include: original inquiry, laboratory and/or theoretical work, literature reading,
formal writing related to research results, and preparing talks or posters for research conferences. Regular
meetings with a faculty advisor and/or research group are expected. Students conducting research that is
not directly tied to ongoing faculty research programs should enroll in Chemistry 391/392. Prerequisite:
Instructor Permission. 1‐6 credit; NE; Not offered 2022‐23
CHEM 395 Research Experience Seminar in Chemistry This seminar course is intended for students who
have completed a summer research project or internship in the chemical sciences. The intent of the course
is to provide students with the opportunity to discuss their research experience, learn from the experiences
of other members of the class, read relevant primary literature, and prepare a poster for a student research
symposium. 3 credits; S/CR/NC; NE, QRE; Fall; Sarah Deel
CHEM 400 Integrative Exercise Three alternatives exist for the department comprehensive exercise. Most
students elect to join a discussion group that studies the research of a distinguished chemist or particular
research problem in depth. Other students elect to write a long paper based on research in the primary
literature, or write a paper expanding on their own research investigations. Most of the work for Chemistry
400 is expected to be accomplished during winter term. Students should enroll for five credits of Chemistry
400 during the winter, receive a "CI" at the end of that term, and then enroll for one credit during the

95
spring, with the final evaluation and grade being awarded during spring term. Starting with the class of
2024, Chemistry majors will be required to attend at least 10 seminars between the term in which they
declare and the end of winter term of their senior year to ensure breadth in the exposure to the ways
chemists approach their work. 1 credit; S/NC; Fall, Winter, Spring

Chinese
See Asian Languages and Literature.

Cinema and Media Studies
The Cinema and Media Studies (CAMS) major combines the critical study of moving image and
sound media with digital video and audio production. Courses range from global and Hollywood
film studies to fiction and nonfiction filmmaking, television studio production, sound design, and
writing for film and television. The integration of theory and practice is a guiding principle in the
formulation of the curriculum, reflecting a liberal arts philosophy in which thinking and making are
mutually informing.
Requirements for the Cinema and Media Studies Major
Seventy-two credits are required for the major: forty-eight credits in core courses and twenty-four
credits in elective courses. In the core curriculum, students are required to enroll in CAMS 110 and
CAMS 111, two 200-level production courses (one of which must be CAMS 270 or CAMS 271),
two 200-level film history courses (one of which must be CAMS 210, CAMS 211 or CAMS 214)
and one 300-level theory seminar (CAMS 320, CAMS 330, CAMS 340). In addition to the core
curriculum, students are required to enroll in four elective courses, choosing from courses taught
departmentally as well as extra-departmentally, with a limit of two courses taught extradepartmentally counting towards elective credit for the major. In the senior-year comps project,
students are asked to develop projects furthering their work in the curriculum.


Two 100‐level Introductory Courses (12 credits):
o CAMS 110 Introduction to Cinema and Media Studies
o CAMS 111 Digital Foundations



Two 200‐level Production Courses (12 credits) one of which must be CAMS 270 or CAMS 271:
o CAMS 222 Collaborative Narrative Filmmaking
o CAMS 245 The Essay Film (not offered in 2022‐23)
o CAMS 263 The Element of Control: Studio Filmmaking (not offered in 2022‐23)
o CAMS 264 Story Development Workshop (not offered in 2022‐23)
o CAMS 265 Sound Design
o CAMS 270 Nonfiction
o CAMS 271 Fiction
o CAMS 273 Digital Editing Workshop (not offered in 2022‐23)
o CAMS 278 Writing for Television (not offered in 2022‐23)
o CAMS 279 Screenwriting
o CAMS 280 Advanced Screenwriting
o CAMS 288 Experimental Film & Video Production
o CAMS 370 Advanced Production Workshop I

96


Two 200‐level Film History Courses (12 credits) one of which must be CAMS 210, CAMS 211 or
CAMS 214.
o CAMS 210 Film History I (not offered in 2022‐23)
o CAMS 211 Film History II
o CAMS 214 Film History III
o CAMS 215 American Television History (not offered in 2022‐23)
o CAMS 246 Documentary Studies



One 300‐level Seminar (6 credits).
o CAMS 320 Sound Studies Seminar (not offered in 2022‐23)
o CAMS 330 Cinema Studies Seminar
o CAMS 340 Television Studies Seminar



Four Elective Courses (24 credits). Credit for elective courses may be obtained by enrolling in any
departmental or approved extra‐departmental courses with the following stipulations:
a) Any CAMS course not fulfilling a core requirement can serve as an elective course for the CAMS
major.
o CAMS 100 Rock 'n' Roll in Cinema
o CAMS 101 Making Media (not offered in 2022‐23)
o CAMS 177 Television Studio Production
o CAMS 186 Film Genres
o CAMS 187 Cult Television and Fan Cultures (not offered in 2022‐23)
o CAMS 210 Film History I (not offered in 2022‐23)
o CAMS 211 Film History II
o CAMS 212 Contemporary Spanish Cinema (not offered in 2022‐23)
o CAMS 214 Film History III
o CAMS 215 American Television History (not offered in 2022‐23)
o CAMS 216 American Cinema of the 1970s (not offered in 2022‐23)
o CAMS 218 Contemporary Global Cinemas
o CAMS 222 Collaborative Narrative Filmmaking
o CAMS 225 Film Noir: The Dark Side of the American Dream
o CAMS 236 Israeli Society in Israeli Cinema (not offered in 2022‐23)
o CAMS 240 Adaptation (not offered in 2022‐23)
o CAMS 245 The Essay Film (not offered in 2022‐23)
o CAMS 246 Documentary Studies
o CAMS 257 Video Games and Identity (not offered in 2022‐23)
o CAMS 258 Feminist and Queer Media
o CAMS 263 The Element of Control: Studio Filmmaking (not offered in 2022‐23)
o CAMS 264 Story Development Workshop (not offered in 2022‐23)
o CAMS 265 Sound Design
o CAMS 267 Contemporary Media Arts Program: Exploring Contemporary Media Arts in New
York and Europe (not offered in 2022‐23)
o CAMS 268 Contemporary Media Arts Program: Media Production Workshop (not offered in
2022‐23)
o CAMS 270 Nonfiction
o CAMS 271 Fiction
o CAMS 273 Digital Editing Workshop (not offered in 2022‐23)
o CAMS 278 Writing for Television (not offered in 2022‐23)
o CAMS 279 Screenwriting
o CAMS 280 Advanced Screenwriting

97
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o

CAMS 288 Experimental Film & Video Production
CAMS 296 Cinema and Cultural Change in Chile and Argentina (not offered in 2022‐23)
CAMS 320 Sound Studies Seminar (not offered in 2022‐23)
CAMS 330 Cinema Studies Seminar
CAMS 340 Television Studies Seminar
CAMS 370 Advanced Production Workshop I
CAMS 371 Advanced Production Workshop II
MUSC 123 The American Film Musical

b) A maximum of 12 credits in extra‐departmental elective courses can count toward fulfillment of
elective credit for the major.
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o

AMST 269 Woodstock Nation (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARTH 171 History of Photography
ARTH 172 Modern Art: 1890‐1945 (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARTH 240 Art Since 1945
ARTH 241 Contemporary Art for Artists
ARTS 339 Advanced Photography (not offered in 2022‐23)
CHIN 239 Digital China: Media, Culture, and Society (not offered in 2022‐23)
CHIN 240 Chinese Cinema in Translation (not offered in 2022‐23)
CHIN 250 Chinese Popular Culture in Translation
CHIN 348 Advanced Chinese: The Mass Media (not offered in 2022‐23)
CS 312 Audio Programming (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 245 Bollywood Nation
ENGL 247 The American West (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 248 Visions of California (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 288 California Program: The Literature of California
ENGL 362 Narrative Theory
FREN 236 Francophone Cinema and the African Experience (not offered in 2022‐23)
GWSS 398 Capstone: Race, Gender, and Sexuality in Popular Culture
JAPN 231 Tradition and Modernity: Japanese Cinema in Translation (not offered in 2022‐23)
JAPN 244 The World of Anime in Translation (not offered in 2022‐23)
JAPN 254 World of Japanese Manga in Translation
LCST 245 The Critical Toolbox: Who's Afraid of Theory?
MELA 121 East‐West in Israeli and Palestinian Fiction and Film (not offered in 2022‐23)
MUSC 115 Listening to the Movies
POSC 203 Political Communication: Political Advertising in Elections and Public Policy (not
offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 204 How American Campaigns and Elections Work (and Don’t Work)
POSC 205 News Media and Democratic Electoral Processes (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 214 Visual Representations of Political Thought and Action
POSC 220 Politics and Political History in Film (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 303 Political Communication: Political Advertising in Elections and Public Policy* (not
offered in 2022‐23)
SPAN 244 Spain Today: Recent Changes through Narrative and Film
SPAN 328 The Contemporary Spanish Fictional Essay (not offered in 2022‐23)
SPAN 356 The Political and Cultural History of the Cuban Revolution (not offered in 2022‐
23)
THEA 320 Live Performance and Digital Media (not offered in 2022‐23)

98


Integrative Exercise CAMS 400 (6 credits)
Students proposing production projects for comps are strongly encouraged to apply to enroll in
CAMS 370 Production Workshop I during the fall term of their senior year and are expected to
enroll in CAMS 371 Production Workshop II and CAMS 400 during the winter term of their senior
year. Students proposing writing projects for comps have the option to enroll in CAMS 400 in the
fall or winter terms of their senior year.

Students considering a major in Cinema and Media Studies are encouraged to take CAMS 110
Introduction to Cinema and Media Studies and CAMS 111 Digital Foundations by the end of their
sophomore year and at least one 200-level film history course (CAMS 210 Film History I, CAMS
211 Film History II, or CAMS 214 Film History III), one 200-level production course (CAMS 270
Nonfiction or 271 Fiction), and the 300-level theory seminar (CAMS 320 Sound Studies Seminar or
CAMS 330 Cinema Studies Seminar or CAMS 340 Television Studies Seminar) by the end of their
junior year.
Cinema and Media Studies Courses
CAMS 100 Rock 'n' Roll in Cinema This course is designed to explore the intersection between rock music
and cinema. Taking a historical view of the evolution of the "rock film," this class examines the impact of
rock music on the structural and formal aspects of narrative, documentary, and experimental films and
videos. The scope of the class will run from the earliest rock films of the mid‐1950s through contemporary
examples in ten weekly subunits. 6 credits; AI, WR1, IDS; Fall; Jay S Beck
CAMS 101 Making Media This class introduces students to the process of making moving‐image media.
How do we generate creative ideas? How do we translate those ideas into moving images and sound?
Students will draw inspiration from a variety of sources that are personal, cultural, and observational, and
in doing so, develop confidence in their own artistic practice and perspective. Production exercises using
consumer tools (smartphones, basic editing software) will introduce students to strategies for ideation and
development for narrative, documentary, and experimental approaches to media production. Those
planning to enroll in 200‐level CAMS production courses will need to take CAMS 111 as a prerequisite.
Students who have taken CAMS 111 cannot take CAMS 101. 6 credits; ARP; Not offered 2022‐23
CAMS 110 Introduction to Cinema and Media Studies This course introduces students to the basic terms,
concepts and methods used in cinema studies and helps build critical skills for analyzing films, technologies,
industries, styles and genres, narrative strategies and ideologies. Students will develop skills in critical
viewing and careful writing via assignments such as a short response essay, a plot segmentation, a shot
breakdown, and various narrative and stylistic analysis papers. Classroom discussion focuses on applying
critical concepts to a wide range of films. Requirements include two evening film screenings per week. Extra
time. 6 credits; LA, WR2; Fall, Spring; Jay S Beck, Carol Donelan
CAMS 111 Digital Foundations This class introduces students to the full range of production tools and
forms, building both the technical and conceptual skills needed to continue at more advanced levels. We
will explore the aesthetics and mechanics of shooting digital video, the role of sound and how to record and
mix it, field and studio production, lighting, and editing with Adobe Premiere Pro CC. Course work will
include individual and group production projects, readings, and writing. This is an essential foundation for
anyone interested in moving‐image production and learning the specifics of CAMS' studios, cameras, and
lighting equipment. 6 credits; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Laska Jimsen, Catherine Licata, Cecilia M Cornejo
CAMS 177 Television Studio Production In this hands‐on studio television production course, students learn
professional studio methods and techniques for creating both fiction and nonfiction television programs.

99
Concepts include lighting and set design, blocking actors, directing cameras, composition, switching, sound
recording and scripting. Students work in teams to produce four assignments, crewing for each other's
productions in front of and behind the camera, in the control room, and in post‐production. 6 credits; ARP;
Fall, Winter; Alexa L Feeney
CAMS 186 Film Genres In this course we survey four or more Hollywood film genres, including but not
limited to the Western, musical, horror film, comedy, and science‐fiction film. What criteria are used to
place a film in a particular genre? What role do audiences and studios play in the creation and definition of
film genres? Where do genres come from? How do genres change over time? What roles do genres play in
the viewing experience? What are hybrid genres and subgenres? What can genres teach us about society?
Assignments aim to develop skills in critical analysis, research and writing. 6 credits; LA, WR2; Fall; Carol
Donelan
CAMS 187 Cult Television and Fan Cultures This course focuses on the history, production, and
consumption of cult television. The beginning of the seminar will be focused on critically examining a
number of theoretical approaches to the study of genre and fandom. Building on these approaches, the
remainder of the course will focus on cult television case studies from the last eight decades. We will draw
on recent scholarship to explore how cult television functions textually, industrially, and culturally.
Additionally, we will study fan communities on the Internet and consider how fansites, webisodes, and sites
like YouTube and Netflix transform television genres. 6 credits; LA, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
CAMS 210 Film History I This course surveys the first half‐century of cinema history, focusing on film
structure and style as well as transformations in technology, industry and society. Topics include series
photography, the nickelodeon boom, local movie‐going, Italian super‐spectacles, early African American
cinema, women film pioneers, abstraction and surrealism, German Expressionism, Soviet silent cinema,
Chaplin and Keaton, the advent of sound and color technologies, the Production Code, the American Studio
System, Britain and early Hitchcock, Popular Front cinema in France, and early Japanese cinema.
Assignments aim to develop skills in close analysis and working with primary sources in researching and
writing film history. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
CAMS 211 Film History II This course charts the continued rise and development of cinema 1948‐1968,
focusing on monuments of world cinema and their industrial, cultural, aesthetic and political contexts.
Topics include postwar Hollywood, melodrama, authorship, film style, labor strikes, runaway production,
censorship, communist paranoia and the blacklist, film noir, Italian neorealism, widescreen aesthetics, the
French New Wave, art cinema, Fellini, Bergman, the Polish School, the Czech New Wave, Japanese and
Indian cinema, political filmmaking in the Third World, and the New Hollywood Cinema. Requirements
include class attendance and participation, readings, evening film screenings, and various written
assignments and exams. 6 credits; LA, IS; Fall; Carol Donelan
CAMS 212 Contemporary Spanish Cinema This course serves as a historical and critical survey of Spanish
cinema from the early 1970s to the present. Topics of study will include the redefinition of Spanish identity
in the post‐Franco era, the rewriting of national history through cinema, cinematic representations of
gender and sexuality, emergent genres, regional cinemas and identities, stars and transnational film
projects, and new Spanish auteurs from the 1980s to the present. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
CAMS 214 Film History III This course is designed to introduce students to recent film history, 1970‐present,
and the multiple permutations of cinema around the globe. The course charts the development of national
cinemas since the 1970s while considering the effects of media consolidation and digital convergence.
Moreover, the course examines how global cinemas have reacted to and dealt with the formal influence

100
and economic domination of Hollywood on international audiences. Class lectures, screenings, and
discussions will consider how cinema has changed from a primarily national phenomenon to a transnational
form in the twenty‐first century. 6 credits; LA, IS; Winter; Jay S Beck
CAMS 215 American Television History This course offers a historical survey of American television from the
late 1940s to today, focusing on early television and the classical network era. Taking a cultural approach to
the subject, this course examines shifts in television portrayals, genres, narrative structures, and aesthetics
in relation to social and cultural trends as well as changing industrial practices. Reading television programs
from the past eight decades critically, we interrogate various representations of consumerism, class, race,
ethnicity, gender, sexuality, lifestyle, and nation in the smaller screen while also tracing issues surrounding
broadcasting policy, censorship, sponsorship, business, and programming. 6 credits; LA, IDS; Not offered
2022‐23
CAMS 216 American Cinema of the 1970s American cinema from 1967‐1979 saw the reconfiguration of
outdated modes of representation in the wake of the Hollywood studio system and an alignment of new
aesthetic forms with radical political and social perspectives. This course examines the film industry's
identity crisis through the cultural, stylistic, and technological changes that accompanied the era. The
course seeks to demonstrate that these changes in cinematic practices reflected an agenda of revitalizing
American cinema as a site for social commentary and cultural change. 6 credits; IDS, LA; Not offered 2022‐
23
CAMS 218 Contemporary Global Cinemas This course is designed as a critical study of global filmmakers and
the issues surrounding cinema and its circulation in the twenty‐first century. The class will emphasize the
close reading of films to study different cultural discourses, cinematic styles, genres, and reception. It will
look at national, transnational, and diasporic‐exilic cinema to consider how films express both cultural
forms and contexts. Aesthetic, social, political, and industrial issues also will be examined each week to
provide different approaches for cinematic analysis. 6 credits; LA, IS; Spring; Jay S Beck
CAMS 222 Collaborative Narrative Filmmaking Narrative films are the product of many specialized artists
working in concert toward a shared artistic vision. In this course, students will explore the essential crew
roles on narrative films and choose an area in which they would like to specialize during the making of a
collaborative project. Through the term, we will move through film development, pre‐production,
production, post‐production, and distribution with each student taking on a specific role in a group project.
The term culminates in the exhibition of films that were made over the previous 10 weeks. Prerequisite:
Cinema and Media Studies 111. 6 credits; ARP; Fall; Catherine Licata
CAMS 225 Film Noir: The Dark Side of the American Dream After Americans grasped the enormity of the
Depression and World War II, the glossy fantasies of 1930s cinema seemed hollow indeed. During the
1940s, the movies, our true national pastime, took a nosedive into pessimism. The result? A collection of
exceptional films populated with tough guys and dangerous women lurking in the shadows of nasty urban
landscapes. This course focuses on classic American noir as well as neo‐noir from a variety of perspectives,
including mode and genre, visual style and narrative structure, postwar culture and politics, and race,
gender, and sexuality. Requirements include two screenings per week and several short papers. 6 credits;
LA, IDS; Winter; Carol Donelan
CAMS 236 Israeli Society in Israeli Cinema This course will introduce students to the global kaleidoscope
that is Israeli society today. Since the 1980s the Israeli public has increasingly engaged with its multicultural
character, particularly through films and documentaries that broaden national conversation. Our approach
to exploring the emerging reflection of Israel’s diversity in its cinema will be thematic. We will study films

101
that foreground religious‐secular, Israeli‐Palestinian, gender, sexual orientation, and family dynamics, as
well as Western‐Middle Eastern Jewish relations, foreign workers or refugees in Israel, army and society,
and Holocaust memory. With critical insights from the professor’s interviews with several directors and
Israeli film scholars. Conducted in English, all films subtitled. Evening film screenings. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not
offered 2022‐23
CAMS 236F Israeli Society in Israeli Cinema ‐ FLAC Hebrew Trailer This course is a supplement in Hebrew for
CAMS 236, Israeli Society in Israeli Cinema. Open to students currently in Hebrew 103 or higher, we will
watch particular film clips from class without subtitles and discuss them in Hebrew. We will also read and
discuss some critical reviews not available in English, and a sample of scholarly writing in Hebrew on Israeli
film and social history. Prerequisite: Hebrew 102; Concurrent registration in Cinema and Media Studies 236.
2 credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐23
CAMS 240 Adaptation Film adaptations of pre‐existing texts (from songs to novels) have been around
almost as long as cinema itself, and the percent of film adaptations continues to grow. (Of the top two‐
thousand movies over the last twenty years fifty‐one percent were adaptations.) In this course we will take
a chronological journey through the history of film adaptations in a variety of film cultures, considering
along the way the processes involved in translating narratives from words to visual media, and how the
cinematic has come to shape the literary (reverse adaptation). Discussions and assignments will aim at both
analysis and practice. 6 credits; LA; Not offered 2022‐23
CAMS 245 The Essay Film This course explores a hybrid cinematic genre whose critical and creative energies
spring from the collision of traditionally separated spheres: documentary and fiction, text and image,
private and public, reason and intuition. We focus on the intersection where creative practice and
intellectual inquiry meet through theoretical readings, film screenings, and the fulfillment of various
production exercises aimed at the production of original film work. Screenings include works by Carmen
Castillo, Chris Marker, Ignacio Agüero, Jem Cohen, Agnés Varda, Harun Farocki, Jonas Mekas, and other
filmmakers who have explored this hybrid form. Prerequisite: Cinema and Media Studies 111. 6 credits;
ARP; Not offered 2022‐23
CAMS 246 Documentary Studies This course explores the relevance and influence of documentary films by
closely examining the aesthetic concerns and ethical implications inherent in these productions. We study
these works both as artistic undertakings and as documents produced within a specific time, culture, and
ideology. Central to our understanding of the form are issues of technology, methodology, and ethics,
which are examined thematically as well as chronologically. The course offers an overview of the major
historical movements in documentary film along more recent works; it combines screenings, readings, and
discussions with the goal of preparing students to both understand and analyze documentary films. 6
credits; LA, IS; Winter; Cecilia M Cornejo
CAMS 257 Video Games and Identity As video games have emerged as a dominant cultural form, they have
become deeply intertwined with broader cultural debates around identity. By analyzing a variety of specific
games as well as the industry that creates them and the communities who play them, we will think through
topics such as liberal multiculturalism, neoliberal capitalism, feminism, queerness, ethical design, the
military‐entertainment complex, GamerGate, and discourses of political correctness. This course will avoid
categorizing games as having “positive” or “negative” social effects and will instead focus on how
videogames function as a window into issues of identity in U.S. culture. 6 credits; LA; Not offered 2022‐23
CAMS 258 Feminist and Queer Media The focus of this course is on spectatorship—feminist, lesbian, queer,
transgender. The seminar interrogates arguments about representation and the viewer’s relationship to the

102
moving image in terms of identification, desire, masquerade, fantasy, power, time, and embodied
experience. The course first explores the founding essays of psychoanalytic feminist film theory, putting
these ideas into dialogue with mainstream cinema. Second, we consider the aesthetic, narrative, and
theoretical interventions posed by feminist filmmakers working in contradistinction to Hollywood. Third,
“queering” contemporary media, we survey challenges and revisions to feminist film theory presented by
considerations of race and ethnicity, transgender experience, and queerness. 6 credits; LA, IDS; Fall;
Candace I Moore
CAMS 263 The Element of Control: Studio Filmmaking How do we bring attention to an artifact or object, a
gesture or speech? In this class students will become familiar with strategies and techniques of studio
practices in film making. Students will be asked to think through the ways control can heighten our
conversations in film, or bring attention to specificities. Through lighting techniques and camera techniques
students will learn the slippery art of controlled environments. Projects will place pressure on students to
integrate elements learned in the studio into larger filmmaking practices while learning conceptual and
historical conversations around the uses of the studio. Prerequisite: Cinema and Media Studies 111 or
instructor permission. 6 credits; ARP; Not offered 2022‐23
CAMS 264 Story Development Workshop This course explores the creative practice of developing stories
for narrative films. Students will draw inspiration from a variety of sources that are personal, cultural, or
observational, and in doing so, develop confidence in their own artistic practice and perspective. We will
learn the fundamentals of dramatic tools, use these tools to make screen ideas evolve, consider audience
reception, and practice giving and receiving constructive critique. By the end of term, students will have
generated ideas for future production projects that reflect their thematic concerns, and have a fully
developed outline for a project that may be realized in an upper level production course. Prerequisite:
Cinema and Media Studies 111. 6 credits; ARP; Not offered 2022‐23
CAMS 265 Sound Design This course examines the theories and techniques of sound design for film and
video. Students will learn the basics of audio recording, sound editing and multi‐track sound design
specifically for the moving image. The goal of the course is a greater understanding of the practices and
concepts associated with soundtrack development through projects using recording equipment and the
digital audio workstation for editing and mixing. Prerequisite: Cinema and Media Studies 111 or instructor
permission. 6 credits; ARP; Winter; Jay S Beck
CAMS 267 Contemporary Media Arts Program: Exploring Contemporary Media Arts in New York and Europe
Experiential learning is at the heart of this course; students will engage directly with filmmakers and arts
organizations through film screenings, studio visits, and workshops. Class discussions, written responses,
and creative projects will provide opportunities for reflection and synthesis as students expand their
knowledge of contemporary media practices. Prerequisite: Participation in OCS Media Arts Program. 6
credits; NE, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
CAMS 268 Contemporary Media Arts Program: Media Production Workshop This course will combine
classes taught by faculty director Laska Jimsen with specialized workshops by filmmakers and media artists
in the cities we visit. Workshops will draw on strengths of the Cinema and Media Studies production
curriculum, including a focus on form/content, sound/image, and theory/practice relationships, while
introducing students to production practices not currently offered at Carleton. Each student will produce
individual and collaborative creative media projects. Prerequisite: Students will need Adobe Creative Cloud
Software and a laptop capable of running that software. Participation in OCS Media Arts Program. 6 credits;
ARP, IS; Not offered 2022‐23

103
CAMS 270 Nonfiction This course addresses nonfiction media as both art form and historical practice by
exploring the expressive, rhetorical, and political possibilities of nonfiction production. A focus on
relationships between form and content and between makers, subjects, and viewers will inform our
approach. Throughout the course we will pay special attention to the ethical concerns that arise from
making media about others' lives. We will engage with diverse modes of nonfiction production including
essayistic, experimental, and participatory forms and create community videos in partnership with
Carleton's Center for Community and Civic Engagement and local organizations. The class culminates in the
production of a significant independent nonfiction media project. Prerequisite: Cinema and Media Studies
111 or instructor consent. 6 credits; ARP; Fall; Laska Jimsen
CAMS 271 Fiction Through a series of exercises, students will explore the fundamentals of making narrative
films. Areas of focus in this course include visual storytelling and cinematography, working with actors, and
story structure. Through readings, screenings, and writing exercises, we will analyze how mood, tone, and
themes are constructed through formal techniques. Course work includes individual and group exercise,
and culminates in individual short narrative projects. Prerequisite: Cinema and Media Studies 111 and one
additional Cinema and Media Studies course, or instructor permission. 6 credits; ARP; Spring; Catherine
Licata
CAMS 273 Digital Editing Workshop This course introduces students to the art of motion picture editing by
combining theoretical and aesthetic study with hands‐on work using the non‐linear digital video editing
software Adobe Premiere. We explore graphic, temporal, spatial, rhythmic and aural relationships in a
variety of moving image forms including classical narrative continuity and documentary storytelling.
Underscoring the strong links between concept, direction, shooting, and editing, this course examines the
close ties between production and post‐production. Through editing assignments and class critique,
students develop expressive techniques and proficiency in basic video and sound editing and post‐
production workflow. Prerequisite: Cinema and Media Studies 111. 6 credits; ARP; Not offered 2022‐23
CAMS 278 Writing for Television TV is a very specific, time‐driven medium. Using examples from scripts and
DVDs, students will learn how to write for an existing TV show, keeping in mind character consistency,
pacing, tone, and compelling storylines. Students will also get a taste of what it's like to be part of a writing
staff as the class itself creates an episode from scratch. Topics such as creating the TV pilot, marketing,
agents, managers, and more will be discussed. Finally, general storytelling tools such as creating better
dialogue, developing fully‐rounded characters, making scene work more exciting, etc., will also be
addressed. Prerequisite: Cinema and Media Studies 110 or 111 or instructor permission. 6 credits; ARP,
WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
CAMS 279 Screenwriting This course teaches students the fundamentals of screenwriting. Topics include
understanding film structure, writing solid dialogue, creating dimensional characters, and establishing
dramatic situations. Art, craft, theory, form, content, concept, genre, narrative strategies and storytelling
tools are discussed. Students turn in weekly assignments, starting with short scenes and problems and then
moving on to character work, synopses, outlines, pitches and more. The goal is for each student to write a
15 to 25 page script for a short film by the end of the term. Prerequisite: Cinema and Media Studies 110 or
111 or instructor permission. 6 credits; ARP, WR2; Winter; Michael Elyanow
CAMS 280 Advanced Screenwriting Topic: Advanced Writing for Television. This is an intensive writing
practicum for motivated students to complete a well‐structured original television pilot. The course will
explore dramatic structure, character motivation and action, and the complex interplay between plot and
character. Students will refine their tools for television writing as they develop and revise their pilot's
logline, tone, stakes, theme, and more. Over ten weeks students will move from concept to outline and

104
then to a full draft of their original pilot. Weekly feedback provides students with an honest evaluation
of their material in a dynamic and supportive environment. Prerequisite: Cinema and Media Studies 264,
278 or 279, or instructor consent. 6 credits; ARP, WR2; Spring
CAMS 288 Experimental Film & Video Production Experimental Film & Video Production is a process‐based
production course focused on the conceptual and technical concerns of experimental film, video and other
time‐based arts. We will explore the personal, cultural, political, and formal/aesthetic aspects of
experimental media through readings, writings, screenings and the production of experimental media
projects. Key course concerns include medium specificity and relationships between sound and image, form
and content, and theory and practice. We will consider “experimental” as a working practice rather than a
genre‐‐a way of testing hypotheses and a process of discovery. Prerequisite: Prerequisite: Cinema and
Media Studies 111 and one additional Cinema and Media Studies course or instructor permission. 6 credits;
ARP; Spring; Laska Jimsen
CAMS 296 Cinema and Cultural Change in Chile and Argentina This course is the second part of a two‐term
sequence beginning with Cinema and Media Studies 295. In order to bring the students into contact with
the cultural and social discourses examined in Cinema and Media Studies 295, this course begins with a
study trip to Santiago and Buenos Aires during the first two weeks in December. Our time will be spent
visiting filmmakers, producers, scholars, and cultural organizations that shape filmmaking practices and
cultural production. The course meets once early in winter term and then involves individual meetings with
the faculty during the first five weeks. The course then meets regularly during the second half of winter
term, when students formally present their projects followed by a group discussion. Prerequisite: Cinema
and Media Studies 295. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
CAMS 320 Sound Studies Seminar This course presents the broader field of Sound Studies, its debates and
issues. Drawing on a diverse set of interdisciplinary perspectives, the seminar explores the range of
academic work on sound to examine the relationship between sound and listening, sound and perception,
sound and memory, and sound and modern thought. Topics addressed include but are not limited to sound
technologies and industries, acoustic perception, sound and image relations, sound in media, philosophies
of listening, sound semiotics, speech and communication, voice and subject formation, sound art, the social
history of noise, and hearing cultures. Prerequisite: Cinema and Media Studies 110 or instructor permission.
6 credits; LA; Not offered 2022‐23
CAMS 330 Cinema Studies Seminar The purpose of this seminar is guide students in developing and
consolidating their conceptual understanding of theories central to the field of cinema studies. Emphasis is
on close reading and discussion of classical and contemporary theories ranging from Eisenstein, Kracauer,
Balazs, Bazin and Barthes to theories of authorship, genre and ideology and trends in contemporary theory
influenced by psychoanalysis, phenomenology and cognitive studies. Prerequisite: Cinema and Media
Studies 110 or instructor permission. 6 credits; LA; Spring; Carol Donelan
CAMS 340 Television Studies Seminar This seminar aims to develop students into savvy critical theorists of
television, knowledgeable about the field, and capable of challenging previous scholarship to invent new
paradigms. The first half of the course surveys texts foundational to television studies while the second half
focuses primarily on television theory and criticism produced over the last two decades. Television Studies
covers a spectrum of approaches to thinking and writing critically about television, including: semiotics;
ideological critique; cultural studies; genre and narrative theories; audience studies; production studies;
and scholarship positioning post‐network television within the contexts of media convergence and digital
media. Prerequisite: Cinema and Media Studies 110 or instructor permission. 6 credits; LA; Winter;
Candace I Moore

105
CAMS 370 Advanced Production Workshop I In this course, students will develop a concept and complete
pre‐production for their CAMS production comps. Students will draw inspiration from a variety of sources
that are personal, cultural, and observational, and in doing so, develop confidence in their own artistic
practice and perspective. We will refine technical and formal strategies, consider audience reception, and
practice giving and receiving constructive critique. Prior to registering for the course, students must submit
a project proposal to the instructor. Final enrollment is based on the quality of the proposal. Note: This
course is intended to prepare students for a Comps production project in winter term and it is the first in a
two part sequence with CAMS 371. If you have any questions about enrolling in this course, please email
the instructor. Prerequisite: Cinema and Media Studies 111, and either Cinema and Media Studies 270 or
271 or instructor consent. 6 credits; ARP; Fall; Catherine Licata
CAMS 371 Advanced Production Workshop II Advanced Production Workshop II is taken in conjunction with
CAMS 400 for students completing production comps. Production projects are inherently collaborative; this
course supports collaboration through workshops, crewing, and informed critique. This course is the second
in the advanced production workshop sequence with a focus on production and post‐production. Please
contact instructor for further information. Prerequisite: Cinema and Media Studies 370 or instructor
consent. 6 credits; ARP; Winter; Laska Jimsen
CAMS 400 Integrative Exercise 6 credits; S/NC; Fall, Winter; Catherine Licata

Classics
Courses in the Department of Classics cover numerous aspects of the ancient Greco-Roman world.
Our courses focus on the study of Greek and Latin literary, historical, and philosophical texts, as
well as evidence from material remains such as art, architecture, and the archaeological remains of
daily life, as well as public and private inscriptions. Courses in the languages (Latin and Greek) are
designed to provide students with a thorough introduction to the language and literature of ancient
Greece and Rome. Courses taught entirely with readings in English (Classics courses) include those
centered around literary genres, Greek and Roman history, and topics such as gender and
archaeology. Completion of the Greek and Latin sequences, 101, 102, 103, and 204, fulfills the
college language requirement.
Requirements for the Classics Major
75 credits total are required for a Classics major.


18 credits in Greek (GRK) and/or Latin (LATN) above the 102 level. This may include courses
designated CLAS‐F (and in some cases HIST‐F)



18 credits in Classical Civilization (CLAS), with one course from each of the three groups below

o

Historical Analysis:
 CLAS 145 Ancient Greek Religion
 CLAS 220 From the Horn to Melqart’s Pillars: African Perspectives in the Ancient
Mediterranean
 CLAS 227 Athens, Sparta, Persia and the Battle for Greece (not offered in 2022‐23)
 CLAS 229 Warlords and the Collapse of the Roman Republic (not offered in 2022‐
23)

106


o

o



CLAS 230 The Rise and Fall of the Great Hellenistic Kingdoms (not offered in 2022‐
23)
 CLAS 240 Rome: From Village to Superpower
 HIST 131 Saints and Society in Late Antiquity
 HIST 133 Crisis, Creativity, and Transformation in Late Antiquity (not offered in
2022‐23)
Archaeological Analysis:
 ARCN 222 Experimental Archaeology and Experiential History
 CLAS 119 Under the Ashes of Vesuvius
 CLAS 122 The Archaeology of Mediterranean Prehistory: From the Beginning to the
Classical Age (not offered in 2022‐23)
 CLAS 123 Greek Archaeology and Art (not offered in 2022‐23)
 CLAS 124 Roman Archaeology and Art (not offered in 2022‐23)
Literary Analysis:
 CLAS 112 The Epic in Classical Antiquity: Texts, Contexts, and Intertexts (not offered
in 2022‐23)
 CLAS 116 Ancient Drama: Truth in Performance (not offered in 2022‐23)
 CLAS 117 From Stage to Screen: Adapting Greek Tragedy (not offered in 2022‐23)
 CLAS 175 Writing the City of Rome: Image, Text, and Site
 CLAS 214 Gender and Sexuality in Classical Antiquity (not offered in 2022‐23)

6 credits required to be taken in the senior year:
o




CLAS 385 Islands in Time: Insular Life, Culture, and History in the Mediterranean World (not
offered in 2022‐23)
o CLAS 386 Classical Myth: Theory, Function, Afterlife
CLAS 400 (3 credits)
Thirty additional credits in the general area of Classical Civilization (CLAS), Latin (LATN), or Greek
(GRK), two of which must be at the 200 level or above.

o
o

Up to 6 of these credits may be from a related department (History, Philosophy, Art
History, Archaeology, Political Science, Religion), subject to adviser approval
Courses from CLAS 384, CLAS 385, CLAS 386, CLAS 387, if taken before the senior year, may
count toward these 30 additional credits

The College language requirement may be satisfied by completion with a grade of at least C- in any
of the Greek or Latin languages numbered 204 or above.
The Classics Departments of Carleton College and St. Olaf College cooperate in a program under
which students of either college may elect certain courses on the other campus. This option is
especially appropriate for upper level language courses not offered at Carleton. Carleton students
should register for St. Olaf courses through the inter-registration process.
The minor in Archaeology will interest many students who are attracted to ancient civilization.
Minors in the Classic Department
The Classics Department offers three Minors in addition to the Classics Major. Per the College’s
guidelines on minors, students who declare a Classics Major are not allowed also to declare a Minor
in the department. For a course to count toward a minor, a grade of C- or better must be earned.

107

These courses cannot be taken on an elective S/Cr/NC basis. The department may make exceptions
if appropriate.
Requirements for the Classics Minor
The Classics Minor is intended for students who wish to gain broad exposure to the study of the
ancient Mediterranean world without required coursework in Greek and/or Latin. To earn a Classics
Minor students must complete 42 total credits as described below:


18 credits in Classical Civilization (CLAS), with one course from each of the three groups below

o

o

o





Historical Analysis:
 CLAS 145 Ancient Greek Religion
 CLAS 220 From the Horn to Melqart’s Pillars: African Perspectives in the Ancient
Mediterranean
 CLAS 227 Athens, Sparta, Persia and the Battle for Greece (not offered in 2022‐23)
 CLAS 229 Warlords and the Collapse of the Roman Republic (not offered in 2022‐
23)
 CLAS 230 The Rise and Fall of the Great Hellenistic Kingdoms (not offered in 2022‐
23)
 CLAS 240 Rome: From Village to Superpower
 HIST 131 Saints and Society in Late Antiquity
 HIST 133 Crisis, Creativity, and Transformation in Late Antiquity (not offered in
2022‐23)
Archaeological Analysis:
 ARCN 222 Experimental Archaeology and Experiential History
 CLAS 119 Under the Ashes of Vesuvius
 CLAS 122 The Archaeology of Mediterranean Prehistory: From the Beginning to the
Classical Age (not offered in 2022‐23)
 CLAS 123 Greek Archaeology and Art (not offered in 2022‐23)
 CLAS 124 Roman Archaeology and Art (not offered in 2022‐23)
Literary Analysis:
 CLAS 112 The Epic in Classical Antiquity: Texts, Contexts, and Intertexts (not offered
in 2022‐23)
 CLAS 116 Ancient Drama: Truth in Performance (not offered in 2022‐23)
 CLAS 117 From Stage to Screen: Adapting Greek Tragedy (not offered in 2022‐23)
 CLAS 175 Writing the City of Rome: Image, Text, and Site
 CLAS 214 Gender and Sexuality in Classical Antiquity (not offered in 2022‐23)

18 additional credits in the general area of Classical Civilization (CLAS); Latin (LATN) or Greek (GRK)
at any level may also count toward the Classics Minor. Six of the 18 credits may be from a related
department (History, Philosophy, Art History, Archaeology, Political Science, Religion), subject to
department chair’s approval.
6 credits from
o CLAS 385 Islands in Time: Insular Life, Culture, and History in the Mediterranean World (not
offered in 2022‐23)
o CLAS 386 Classical Myth: Theory, Function, Afterlife

108

Requirements for the Greek Minor
The Greek Minor is intended for students who wish to deepen their understanding of the language
and develop a fuller context for the literature and culture of the classical period. Students wishing to
earn a Greek Minor must complete 42 credits of course-work as described below:





at least 18 credits in the Greek language (GRK) at the 200 level or above.
18 additional credits in upper‐level Greek (GRK), Latin (LATN) at any level, or Classics (CLAS). Six of
the 18 credits may be from a related department (History, Philosophy, Art History, Archaeology,
Political Science, Religion), subject to department chair’s approval.
6 credits from CLAS 384, CLAS 385, CLAS 386, CLAS 387

Requirements for the Latin Minor
The Latin Minor is intended for students who wish to deepen their understanding of the language
and develop a fuller context for the literature and culture of the classical period. Students wishing to
earn a Latin Minor must complete 42 credits of course-work as described below:





at least 18 credits in the Latin language (LATN) at the 200 level or above.
18 additional credits in upper‐level Latin (LATN), Greek (GRK) at any level, or Classics (CLAS). Six of
the 18 credits may be from a related department (History, Philosophy, Art History, Archaeology,
Political Science, Religion), subject to department chair’s approval.
6 credits from CLAS 384, CLAS 385, CLAS 386, CLAS 387

Classics Courses (CLAS)
(These courses do not presume knowledge of Greek or Latin)
CLAS 100 Living Like a Stoic Worried about the state of the world? Could you be happier? Should you be
happier? Recent research in positive psychology has established some definite ideas about what makes
people happy, but most of these ideas are not new. In fact, publications on happiness often cite ancient
philosophers as confirmation for many of their findings. This course will examine the ancient system of
thought known as Stoicism to establish the broad principles that form its basis and will offer concrete ways
to put those principles into practice in order to achieve happiness, including one mandatory week of living
like a Stoic. 6 credits; AI, WR1; Fall; Chico L Zimmerman
CLAS 112 The Epic in Classical Antiquity: Texts, Contexts, and Intertexts It would be difficult to overstate the
importance of the early Greek epics for the classical world and the western literary tradition that emerged
from that world. This course will study closely both the Iliad and the Odyssey, as well as Hesiod’s Theogony,
and then consider a range of works that draw upon these epics for their creator’s own purposes, including
Virgil’s own epic, the Aeneid. By exploring the reception and influence of ancient epic, we will develop an
appreciation for intertextuality and the dynamics of reading in general as it applies to generations of
readers, including our own. 6 credits; LA, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
CLAS 116 Ancient Drama: Truth in Performance What is theater for? Enormous and diverse audiences
flocked to tragedy and comedy in Athens, drawn to the spectacle, music, and collective emotional
experience. But drama also pushed the city to consider fundamental questions about power, conflicting
values, competing obligations to family and community. Athenians believed that theater was beneficial to

109
their democracy. Can these ancient plays help us, now, think about our own communal questions? This
course will focus on plays of Aeschylus, Sophocles, Euripides and Aristophanes as they were first
performed, and investigate how modern productions engage pressing current questions around race,
immigration, and social justice. 6 credits; ARP, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
CLAS 117 From Stage to Screen: Adapting Greek Tragedy The terms “reboot,” “retelling,” and “adaptation”
are all over TV and film. While some adaptations are praised for their creativity with the source material,
others are panned. So what makes an adaptation good or bad? In this class, we will approach this question
through Greek tragedy. We will read plays such as Oedipus Tyrannus, Antigone, Medea, and the Oresteia in
translation alongside films from around the world in order to understand how directors and writers relate
these ancient works to their own settings and struggles, decade after decade. 6 credits; LA; Not offered
2022‐23
CLAS 119 Under the Ashes of Vesuvius Pompeii, a Roman town famously destroyed but uniquely preserved
by the Vesuvian eruption of 79CE, has traditionally been viewed as a quintessential example of the ancient
Roman urban experience. But how ‘Roman’ was Pompeii? In this class, we will examine how evidence from
that buried city contributes to our understanding of Roman art and architecture, and the everyday use of
urban space; and how this, in turn, can help us interrogate what it meant to be ‘Roman’ in the ancient
Mediterranean world. 6 credits; LA; Winter; Victoria Austen
CLAS 122 The Archaeology of Mediterranean Prehistory: From the Beginning to the Classical Age "Never say
that prehistory is not history." The late Fernand Braudel had it right. Over 99 percent of human history
predates the written word, and this course examines one of the world's most diverse, yet unifying
environments‐‐the Mediterranean Sea‐‐from the earliest populations around its shores to the emergence
of the Classical world of the Greeks and Romans. Neanderthals and modern humans, the first artists and
farmers, multiculturalism among Greeks, Phoenicians, Etruscans, and others... These are some of the topics
to be covered as we study the precursors and roots of what would become "Western" civilization. 6 credits;
HI; Not offered 2022‐23
CLAS 123 Greek Archaeology and Art This course explores the archaeology and art of the Ancient Greek
world. Beginning with prehistory, we will track the development of the material culture of Ancient Greece
through the Classical and Hellenistic periods, and conclude by discussing aspects of the Roman, Byzantine,
and Ottoman empires that followed. We will focus throughout on aspects of archaeological practice,
material culture and text, art and society, long‐term social change, and the role of the past in the present. 6
credits; HI, IS, QRE; Not offered 2022‐23
CLAS 124 Roman Archaeology and Art The material worlds of the ancient Romans loom large in our cultural
imagination. No other civilization has made as direct a contribution to our own political system or to its
physical vestiges of power and authority. From the architecture of the state to visual narratives of
propaganda, Roman influence is ubiquitous in the monuments of western civilization. But what were the
origins of the Romans? Their innovations? Their technical, artistic, and ideological achievements? How are
they relevant today? This course explores these questions and more through the archaeology of the eternal
city and beyond. 6 credits; HI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
CLAS 130 The Greek and Latin Roots of English We speak it every day on campus, and it is the second most
common language on the planet, but where did English come from? While its basic grammar is Germanic,
much of its vocabulary—probably around 60 percent—comes from Greek and Latin. This course explores
the varied and fascinating contributions that these two languages have made to English, focusing on the
basic building blocks of words—bases, prefixes, and suffixes—while also considering the many routes the

110
Classical languages have taken to enter modern English. This course is suitable for students of science,
linguistics, and literature, as well as language lovers generally. 6 credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐23
CLAS 145 Ancient Greek Religion Greek religion played a crucial role in how the ancient Greeks understood
the world around them. Mythology and cosmology shaped their understanding of how the world worked,
while the ritual of sacrifice formed the basis of the social fabric underpinning all aspects of Greek society. In
this course we will learn about Greece's polytheistic belief system‐‐its gods and religious rites‐‐as well as
examining how religion shaped the daily lives of ordinary Greeks, often in surprising ways. We will read the
works of ancient authors such as Homer and Hesiod, study the archaeological remains of sacred sites,
inscriptions, and curse tablets, as well as engage with experimental archaeology. 6 credits; HI, IS; Spring;
Jake N Morton
CLAS 175 Writing the City of Rome: Image, Text, and Site Ancient Rome has occupied a unique place in the
Western consciousness for over 2000 years. It is a city that has inspired many texts, and both its physical
fabric and symbolic nature have been reworked and rethought by archaeologists, historians, and literary
critics alike. For the ancients, ‘Rome’ took on meaning not just from its concrete monuments, but also from
the literary motifs and symbols it evoked. In this class, we will consider how Rome is used as both a setting
and inspiration for Latin poetry, and consider how poets both represented and created an image of ‘Rome’.
6 credits; LA; Spring; Victoria Austen
CLAS 214 Gender and Sexuality in Classical Antiquity In both ancient Greece and Rome, gender (along with
class and citizenship status) largely determined what people did, where they spent their time, and how they
related to others. This course will examine the ways in which Greek and Roman societies defined gender
categories, and how they used them to think about larger social, political, and religious issues. Primary
readings from Greek and Roman epic, lyric, and drama, as well as ancient historical, philosophical, and
medical writers; in addition we will explore a range of secondary work on the topic from the perspectives of
Classics and Gender Studies. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IS, QRE; Not offered 2022‐23
CLAS 215 Ancient Greek and Roman Sexuality In this course we will question whether or not the ancient
Greeks and Romans defined “sexuality” by object‐choice, whether they understood sexuality as an integral
component of one’s personal identity, and whether they had a concept of “sexuality” as we currently
understand it. Emphasis will be on primary texts that demonstrate notions of sexual normativity and/or
identity, such as Aristophanes’ Thesmophoriazousae, Plato’s Symposium, Aeschines’ Against Timarchos, and
poetry of Sappho, Catullus, Ovid, Martial, and Juvenal. We will also read modern critical theorists (Foucault,
Halperin, Richlin, Winkler), and will interrogate their arguments. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
CLAS 220 From the Horn to Melqart’s Pillars: African Perspectives in the Ancient Mediterranean Histories of
the classical world often focus on the cultures of Greece and Rome, situated on the northern shores of the
Mediterranean. But what can we discover if we ‘flip’ our map of the Mediterranean, putting African
perspectives on top? In this class, we will engage with the artistic, literary, and archaeological evidence left
to us by the Mediterranean societies of classical Africa, as well as the ways in which these societies are
depicted by Greek and Roman sources. Topics covered include ancient Egypt, the colonial “middle ground”
of North Africa, and other African cultures on the Mediterranean periphery. 6 credits; HI, WR2; Fall; Jordan
R Rogers
CLAS 227 Athens, Sparta, Persia and the Battle for Greece Forged in the crucible of wars fought between
cultures with diametrically opposed views on politics and society, the fifth century BC witnessed arts,
philosophy, and science all flourish in thrilling new ways. The two radically different Greek states of Athens
and Sparta first teamed up to defeat the invading Persian empire. While this shocking victory spurred their

111
respective cultures to new heights, their political aspirations drove them to turn on each other and fight a
series of wars over control of Greece‐‐all the while with Persia waiting in the wings. We will study these
events against the backdrop of the political, intellectual, and cultural achievements of Athens, Sparta and
Persia, drawing on the rich body of literature and material culture from this period. 6 credits; HI, IS; Not
offered 2022‐23
CLAS 229 Warlords and the Collapse of the Roman Republic The class will investigate the factors that led a
Republican government that had lasted for 700 years to fall apart, leading to twenty years of civil war that
only ended with the rise of a totalitarian dictatorship. We will look at the economic, social, military, and
religious factors that played key roles in this dynamic political period. We will also trace the rise and
influence of Roman warlords, politicians, and personalities and how they changed Roman politics and
society. We will study many of the greatest characters in Roman history, as well as the lives of everyday
Romans in this turbulent time. 6 credits; HI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
CLAS 230 The Rise and Fall of the Great Hellenistic Kingdoms Alexander the Great united the Greek states
by force before waging a ten‐year campaign that brought Greek influence all the way to India. In the
aftermath of Alexander's death, his generals divided the world into kingdoms. These kingdoms presided
over an extraordinary flourishing of arts and science over the next 300 years. However, this period also saw
these kingdoms continuously strive for domination over one another until they were ultimately dominated
by the rising power of Rome. This class will explore one of the most exciting periods in ancient history, a
time of great cultural achievements, larger than life characters, and devastating conflicts. 6 credits; HI, IS;
Not offered 2022‐23
CLAS 240 Rome: From Village to Superpower This class will investigate how Rome rose from a humble
village of outcasts and refugees to become the preeminent power in the entire Mediterranean. We will
trace Rome's political evolution from kings to the Republic, alongside their gradual takeover of the Italian
peninsula. We will study how Rome then swiftly overpowered what had been the most powerful kingdoms
in the Mediterranean and established themselves as dominant. Who were these Romans and what were
their political, military, religious, and social systems that enabled them to accomplish so much? What
critical events shaped their development and ultimately led to total political control of the Mediterranean
world? 6 credits; HI, IS; Winter; Jake N Morton
CLAS 385 Islands in Time: Insular Life, Culture, and History in the Mediterranean World The Mediterranean
is a world of islands, par excellence. This is particularly true of the classical world, when island polities,
sanctuaries, and destinations played crucial roles in several aspects of social life and cultural production.
This seminar examines what’s special about islands and why and how they came to be places of such
significance in the ancient Mediterranean. We will begin with some consideration of our sources and
theories of insularity, then move into thematic and conceptual discussions of island biogeography and
efflorescence; islands in myth and as political and religious spaces; and islands as strategic territories and
connective nodes. Topics in the second part of the class will to a large extent be driven by student interests.
Prerequisite: At least two previous Classics courses or instructor consent. 6 credits; HI; Not offered 2022‐23
CLAS 386 Classical Myth: Theory, Function, Afterlife Stories of gods, heroes and monsters were a pervasive
part of life in ancient Greece and Rome, integrated into landscape, the built environment and cultural
practice from ritual worship to informal storytelling, and they have retained their power to fascinate
through subsequent eras. This seminar will investigate the roles myth played in the ancient world, drawing
on literary, historical and archaeological evidence, as well as the most prominent theoretical frameworks
for interpreting myths, and some examples of modern adaptations. Topics in the second half of the course
will be driven by student interests as they develop their own research and present it at the department

112
Symposium. Prerequisite: At least two courses in Classics or instructor consent. 6 credits; NE; Fall; Clara S
Hardy
CLAS 400 Senior Research Project From topics developed in Classics 384, 385, 386, or 387, departmental
majors will expand and refine their research into articles to be submitted to a journal of professional style,
accepted and edited by the group into a presentable volume. Prerequisite: Classics 384, Classics 385,
Classics 386 or Classics 387. 3 credits; S/NC; Winter; Chico L Zimmerman

Greek Courses (GRK)
These courses all involve acquiring or using ancient Greek
GRK 101 Elementary Greek From the triceratops (“three‐horned‐face”) to the antarctic (“opposite‐the‐bear‐
constellation”), ancient Greek has left traces in our language, literature (epic, tragedy, comedy), ways of
organizing knowledge (philosophy, history, physics), and society (democracy, oligarchy, autocracy). It gives
access to original texts from ancient Greece, early Christianity, and the Byzantine Empire, not to mention
modern scientific terminology. In Greek 101 students will develop knowledge of basic vocabulary and
grammar, and will begin reading short passages of prose and poetry. The class will meet five days a week. 6
credits; NE; Winter; Jordan R Rogers
GRK 102 Intermediate Greek Study of essential forms and grammar, with reading of original, unadapted
passages. Prerequisite: Greek 101 with a grade of at least C‐. 6 credits; NE; Spring; Chico L Zimmerman
GRK 103 Greek Prose Selected prose readings. The course will emphasize review of grammar and include
Greek composition. Prerequisite: Greek 102 with a grade of at least C‐. 6 credits; NE; Fall; Jordan R Rogers
GRK 204 Intermediate Greek Prose and Poetry The goal for Intermediate Greek Prose and Poetry is to gain
experience in the three major modes of Greek expression most often encountered “in the wild”—prose,
poetry, and inscriptions—while exploring the notion of happiness and the good life. By combining all three
modes into this one course, we hope both to create a suitable closure to the language sequence and to
provide a reasonable foundation for further exploration of Greek literature and culture. Prerequisite: Greek
103 with a grade of at least C‐. 6 credits; NE; Winter; Jake N Morton
GRK 220 Euripides We will read Euripides’ Helen in Greek, in which the tragedian creates a plot around
the non‐standard version of events: Helen never went to Troy, she spent the entire war in Egypt; the
Greeks and Trojans were fooled by a simulacrum. The resulting play is a tragicomedy or a romantitragedy
that deliberately skews literary expectations. We will read a number of Euripides’ other extant tragedies in
English, as well as critical studies that examine key issues in Euripidean criticism: the genre of
tragedy, Euripides' depiction of women, and the role of rhetoric in late fifth‐century Athens. Prerequisite:
Greek 204 or the equivalent. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
GRK 225 Creating Family in Ancient Athens What is a family and why does it matter? How is it created and
who defines it? In this class we will read selections from a range of Greek literature—in the original and in
translation—to determine our own answers to these questions. Texts such as the Theogony,
Sophocles’ Antigone, and Euripides’ Andromache, Xenophon’s Oeconomicus, and Aristotle’s Politics will
guide us in our exploration of the political and personal motivations behind the way Athens defined and
regulated families. Prerequisite: Greek 204 or equivalent. 6 credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐23
GRK 231 Homer: The Iliad Homer is perhaps the foundational poet of the western canon, and his work has
been justly admired since its emergence out of the oral tradition of bardic recitation in the eighth century

113
BCE. This course will sample key events and passages from the Iliad, exploring the fascinating linguistic and
metrical features of the epic dialect, as well as the major thematic elements of this timeless story of conflict
and reconciliation during the war at Troy. Prerequisite: Greek 204 or equivalent. 6 credits; LA; Not offered
2022‐23
GRK 240 Xenophon's Oeconomicus While ostensibly a dialogue about how to manage one’s household
(oikos), Xenophon’s Oeconomicus provides valuable insights into the ideology of land‐ownership in classical
Greece. In this class, we will read significant portions of Xenophon’s Oeconomicus in Greek as well as other
texts, in English and Greek, that explore household economics. Throughout, we will consider what
Xenophon’s text reveals about perceptions of gender roles within the home, notions of citizenship, the role
of education, and the institution of slavery in the ancient world. Students will also work together to
produce a student commentary of the text. Prerequisite: Greek 204 or equivalent. 6 credits; LA, IS; Spring;
Jordan R Rogers
GRK 245 Herodotus's Histories In this course we will read and examine selections from Herodotus's
Histories in Greek, as well as the whole of the work in English. We will explore questions about
historiography, culture, ethnicity, ancient warfare, contact between Greece and Persia, among other issues.
Prerequisite: Greek 204 or the equivalent. 6 credits; LA; Not offered 2022‐23
GRK 285 Weekly Greek This course is intended for students who have completed Greek 204 (or equivalent)
and wish to maintain and deepen their language skills. Students will meet weekly to review prepared
passages, as well as reading at sight. Actual reading content will be determined prior to the start of term by
the instructor in consultation with the students who have enrolled. There will be brief, periodic
assessments of language comprehension throughout the term. Prerequisite: Greek 204 or equivalent. 2
credits; S/CR/NC; NE; Fall, Winter; Chico L Zimmerman, Clara S Hardy

Latin Courses (LATN)
These courses all involve acquiring or using Latin
LATN 101 Elementary Latin While many claims are made about the benefits of learning Latin, here’s what
we know for sure: it’s a beautiful language, both intensely precise and rigorous, as well as poetically
expressive and inviting. Spoken by millions in the ancient world and kept continuously “alive” up to the
present, Latin provides a window onto an intellectual and cultural landscape that is both foreign and
familiar to modern students. This beginning course will develop necessary vocabulary, forms, and grammar
that allows students to begin reading short passages of unadulterated prose and poetry from the ancient
Roman world right from the start. 6 credits; NE; Fall; Victoria Austen
LATN 102 Intermediate Latin Continuation of essential forms and grammar. Prerequisite: Latin 101 with a
grade of at least C‐ or placement. 6 credits; NE; Winter; Chico L Zimmerman
LATN 103 Introduction to Latin Prose and Poetry This course completes the formal textbook introduction to
the morphology and syntax of Latin. The focus will be on consolidating and applying grammatical concepts
learned throughout the Latin sequence to the reading of extended selections of authentic Roman prose and
poetry. Prerequisite: Latin 102 with a grade of at least C‐ or placement. 6 credits; NE; Spring; Jordan R
Rogers
LATN 204 Intermediate Latin Prose and Poetry What are the “rules” of friendship? Would you do anything
for a friend? Anything? The ancient Romans were no strangers to the often paradoxical demands of
friendship and love. The goal for Intermediate Latin Prose and Poetry is to gain experience in the three

114
major modes of Latin expression most often encountered “in the wild”—prose, poetry, and inscriptions—
while exploring the notion of friendship. By combining all three modes into this one course, we hope both
to create a suitable closure to the language sequence and to provide a reasonable foundation for further
exploration of Roman literature and culture. Prerequisite: Latin 103 with a grade of at least C‐ or
placement. 6 credits; NE; Fall; Chico L Zimmerman
LATN 233 The Catilinarian Conspiracy In 63 BC, a frustrated Roman nobleman named Catiline attempted to
start a revolution to overthrow the Roman government, only to be exposed and stopped by the politician
Cicero. At least, that is how Cicero depicts it, and we will read part of Cicero's speech that led to Catiline's
condemnation. However, we will also read the contemporary Roman historian Sallust's magisterial account
of the events which reveals a more complicated story about both Catiline and the senators' response. These
are two of the greatest works in Latin literature and reading them together will allow us to investigate what
really happened in 63 BC. Prerequisite: Latin 204 or equivalent. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
LATN 234 Julius Caesar: the Gallic and Civil Wars Julius Caesar spent ten years campaigning in Gaul before
being called back to Rome to face a splintered Republic and protracted Civil War. Caesar wrote fascinating
accounts of both these wars, going beyond tactics to include ethnography, allegories of the Roman Republic
in foreign societies, and analysis of why and how the civil war erupted and who was responsible. We will
read significant portions of Caesar's Gallic War and Civil War, as well as writings about Caesar by
contemporaneous authors. Caesar's elegant and clear prose belies a complex explanation and justification
of the collapse of the Republic. Prerequisite: Latin 204 or equivalent. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
LATN 236 Plautus and Roman Comedy Mistaken identities, forbidden trysts, and a healthy dose of punny
humor characterize many of the comedic plays of the Roman playwright Plautus. In this class, we will read
the entirety of one of Plautus’ plays, Mostellaria (“The Haunted House”) in Latin, while reading selections
from several other plays in English. Along the way, we will stop to consider the influence of Greek comedies
on Plautus’, the importance of comedic performance to Roman society, the settings and venues of these
performances, and the social status of comedic performers, all to come to a fuller understanding of Plautus’
language and plays. Prerequisite: Latin 204 or equivalent. 6 credits; LA; Not offered 2022‐23
LATN 243 Medieval Latin This course offers students an introduction to post‐classical Latin (250‐1450)
through readings in prose and poetry drawn from a variety of genres and periods. Students will also gain
experience with medieval Latin paleography and codicology through occasional workshops in Special
Collections. Prerequisite: Latin 204 or equivalent, Latin placement exam or instructor's permission. 6
credits; LA; Not offered 2022‐23
LATN 255 Biography, History, and Empire in Tacitus’ Agricola How is it possible to be a good person in a
morally deficient system? Part biography, part history, part eulogy, and part invective against Roman
Emperor Domitian, Tacitus’ Agricola charts the life and military accomplishments of the author’s father‐in‐
law, Gnaeus Julius Agricola, in modern‐day Britain. In conversation with other readings in English, we will
engage closely with the style and language of the text in Latin as we explore the constraints and possibilities
of genre, Tacitus’ understanding of geography and ethnicity. Prerequisite: Latin 204 or equivalent. 6 credits;
LA; Winter; Jordan R Rogers
LATN 259 Seminar: Vergil Intensive study of selections from Vergil. May be offered simultaneously with
Latin 359 without the supplemental assignments for advanced students. Prerequisite: Latin 204 or the
equivalent. 6 credits; LA; Not offered 2022‐23
LATN 285 Weekly Latin This course is intended for students who have completed Latin 204 (or equivalent)
and wish to maintain and deepen their language skills. Students will meet weekly to review prepared

115
passages, as well as reading at sight. Actual reading content will be determined prior to the start of term by
the instructor in consultation with the students who have enrolled. There will be brief, periodic
assessments of language comprehension throughout the term. Prerequisite: Latin 204 or equivalent. 2
credits; S/CR/NC; NE; Fall, Spring; Chico L Zimmerman, Clara S Hardy

Cognitive Science
Cognitive Science examines different approaches to questions concerning the nature of mind, the
representation of knowledge, the acquisition, comprehension, and production of language, the
development of learning and intelligence, the use of information to draw inferences and make
decisions, and the assessment of "goodness of fit" between purportedly similar systems (e.g., the
computer and the mind). Exploration of some or all of these questions has been and is being
undertaken in such disciplines as cognitive psychology, linguistics, philosophy, artificial
intelligence, neuroscience, social cognition, anthropology, education and others.
The major and minor in Cognitive Science therefore represent a formal means of bringing together
students and faculty in different disciplines who share common interests. We seek to enrich the
view provided by any one discipline through an exploration or the methodologies of others. The
minor is designed for students majoring in psychology, philosophy, computer science, or linguistics,
although all students are welcome.
Requirements for the Cognitive Science Major
Total credits required for the major: 70
Required courses: 46 credits









CGSC 130 Introduction to Cognitive Science (6 credits)
CGSC 232/CGSC 233/PSYC 232/PSYC 233 Cognitive Processes and Laboratory in Cognitive Processes
(8 credits)
CS 111 Introduction to Computer Science or PHIL 210 Logic (6 credits)
LING 115 Introduction to Theory of Syntax (6 credits)
PSYC 200/201 Measurement and Data Analysis (8 credits)
CGSC 391/392 (6 credits)
CGSC 396 Directed Research in Cognitive Studies (3 credits)
CGSC 400 Integrative Exercise (3 credits)

Note: Prior to beginning the comps sequence, majors must normally have completed CGSC 130,
CGSC 232/233 and PSYC 200/201
Elective Courses: 24 credits from the following list. At least two must be a 300-level course. To
ensure sufficient interdisciplinarity, no more than four courses may be taken from any one
department or program.





BIOL 365 Seminar: Topics in Neuroscience
BIOL 368 Seminar: Developmental Neurobiology
BIOL 379 Seminar: Behavioral Genetics
BIOL 386 Neurobiology (not offered in 2022‐23)

116


















































CGSC 236 Thinking, Reasoning, and Decision Making
CGSC 330 Embodied Cognition
CGSC 336 Moral Thinking, Reasoning, and Decision Making (not offered in 2022‐23)
CGSC 340 Phenomenology and Cognitive Science (not offered in 2022‐23)
CGSC 382 Cognitive Development in Children and Adolescents
CGSC 386 Adolescent Cognitive Development: Developing an Identity and Life Plans (not offered in
2022‐23)
CS 254 Computability and Complexity
CS 314 Data Visualization
CS 321 Making Decisions with Artificial Intelligence
CS 322 Natural Language Processing (not offered in 2022‐23)
CS 344 Human‐Computer Interaction (not offered in 2022‐23)
CS 361 Artificial Life and Digital Evolution
ECON 265 Game Theory and Economic Applications
ECON 267 Behavioral Economics
EDUC 234 Educational Psychology
IDSC 250 Color!
LING 117 Sociophonetics
LING 150 From Esperanto to Dothraki: The Linguistics of Invented Languages
LING 216 Generative Approaches to Syntax
LING 217 Phonetics and Phonology
LING 240 Semantics and Pragmatics (not offered in 2022‐23)
LING 275 First Language Acquisition (not offered in 2022‐23)
LING 280 Field Methods in Linguistics (not offered in 2022‐23)
LING 285 Japanese Linguistics in Kyoto Seminar: The Linguistics of the Japanese Writing System
LING 315 Topics in Syntax
LING 316 Topics in Morphology (not offered in 2022‐23)
LING 317 Topics in Phonology
LING 325 Syntax of an Unfamiliar Language (not offered in 2022‐23)
LING 340 Topics in Semantics (not offered in 2022‐23)
LING 375 Second Language Acquisition: Speech (not offered in 2022‐23)
MUSC 227 Perception and Cognition of Music
NEUR 127 Foundations in Neuroscience and Lab
PHIL 100 Science, Faith and Rationality
PHIL 116 Sensation, Induction, Abduction, Deduction, Seduction (not offered in 2022‐23)
PHIL 203 Bias, Belief, Community, Emotion
PHIL 217 Reason in Context: Limitations and Possibilities (not offered in 2022‐23)
PHIL 223 Philosophy of Language (not offered in 2022‐23)
PHIL 225 Philosophy of Mind (not offered in 2022‐23)
PHIL 251 Evidence, Objectivity, and Realism in the Sciences (not offered in 2022‐23)
PHIL 272 Early Modern Philosophy: Seventeenth and Eighteenth Century Philosophy
PHIL 273 Kant's Metaphysics (not offered in 2022‐23)
PHIL 287 Conspiracy Theories and Dogmatism (not offered in 2022‐23)
PHIL 303 Bias, Belief, Community, Emotion (not offered in 2022‐23)
PHIL 373 Reptiles and Demons
PSYC 216 Behavioral Neuroscience
PSYC 220 Sensation and Perception
PSYC 234 Psychology of Language
PSYC 238 Memory Processes (not offered in 2022‐23)
PSYC 250 Developmental Psychology (not offered in 2022‐23)

117







PSYC 258 Social Cognition (not offered in 2022‐23)
PSYC 267 Clinical Neuroscience (not offered in 2022‐23)
PSYC 366 Cognitive Neuroscience (not offered in 2022‐23)
PSYC 367 Neuropsychology of Aging
PSYC 371 Evolutionary and Developmental Trends in Cognition (not offered in 2022‐23)
PSYC 375 Language and Deception (not offered in 2022‐23)

Requirements for the Cognitive Science Minor
To encourage breadth within the minor, normally no more than four courses taken from a single
department or program may be counted toward the minimum eight courses required.
Core Courses: (26 credits of four six-credit courses plus one two-credit lab course)



CGSC 130 Introduction to Cognitive Science
CGSC 232/CGSC 233/PSYC 232/PSYC 233 Cognitive Processes and Laboratory in Cognitive Processes
(8 credits)

Plus any two of the following courses:




CS 111 Introduction to Computer Science
LING 115 Introduction to Theory of Syntax
PHIL 210 Logic

Elective Courses: 24 credits from the following list. At least one must be a 300-level course. To
ensure sufficient interdisciplinarity, no more than four courses may be taken from any one
department or program.





















BIOL 365 Seminar: Topics in Neuroscience
BIOL 368 Seminar: Developmental Neurobiology
BIOL 379 Seminar: Behavioral Genetics
BIOL 386 Neurobiology (not offered in 2022‐23)
CGSC 236 Thinking, Reasoning, and Decision Making
CGSC 330 Embodied Cognition
CGSC 336 Moral Thinking, Reasoning, and Decision Making (not offered in 2022‐23)
CGSC 340 Phenomenology and Cognitive Science (not offered in 2022‐23)
CGSC 382 Cognitive Development in Children and Adolescents
CGSC 386 Adolescent Cognitive Development: Developing an Identity and Life Plans (not offered in
2022‐23)
CS 254 Computability and Complexity
CS 314 Data Visualization
CS 321 Making Decisions with Artificial Intelligence
CS 322 Natural Language Processing (not offered in 2022‐23)
CS 344 Human‐Computer Interaction (not offered in 2022‐23)
CS 361 Artificial Life and Digital Evolution
ECON 265 Game Theory and Economic Applications
ECON 267 Behavioral Economics
EDUC 234 Educational Psychology
IDSC 250 Color!

118








































LING 117 Sociophonetics
LING 150 From Esperanto to Dothraki: The Linguistics of Invented Languages
LING 216 Generative Approaches to Syntax
LING 217 Phonetics and Phonology
LING 240 Semantics and Pragmatics (not offered in 2022‐23)
LING 275 First Language Acquisition (not offered in 2022‐23)
LING 280 Field Methods in Linguistics (not offered in 2022‐23)
LING 285 Japanese Linguistics in Kyoto Seminar: The Linguistics of the Japanese Writing System
LING 315 Topics in Syntax
LING 316 Topics in Morphology (not offered in 2022‐23)
LING 317 Topics in Phonology
LING 325 Syntax of an Unfamiliar Language (not offered in 2022‐23)
LING 340 Topics in Semantics (not offered in 2022‐23)
LING 375 Second Language Acquisition: Speech (not offered in 2022‐23)
MUSC 227 Perception and Cognition of Music
NEUR 127 Foundations in Neuroscience and Lab
PHIL 100 Science, Faith and Rationality
PHIL 116 Sensation, Induction, Abduction, Deduction, Seduction (not offered in 2022‐23)
PHIL 203 Bias, Belief, Community, Emotion
PHIL 217 Reason in Context: Limitations and Possibilities (not offered in 2022‐23)
PHIL 223 Philosophy of Language (not offered in 2022‐23)
PHIL 225 Philosophy of Mind (not offered in 2022‐23)
PHIL 251 Evidence, Objectivity, and Realism in the Sciences (not offered in 2022‐23)
PHIL 272 Early Modern Philosophy: Seventeenth and Eighteenth Century Philosophy
PHIL 273 Kant's Metaphysics (not offered in 2022‐23)
PHIL 287 Conspiracy Theories and Dogmatism (not offered in 2022‐23)
PHIL 303 Bias, Belief, Community, Emotion (not offered in 2022‐23)
PHIL 373 Reptiles and Demons
PSYC 216 Behavioral Neuroscience
PSYC 220 Sensation and Perception
PSYC 234 Psychology of Language
PSYC 238 Memory Processes (not offered in 2022‐23)
PSYC 250 Developmental Psychology (not offered in 2022‐23)
PSYC 258 Social Cognition (not offered in 2022‐23)
PSYC 267 Clinical Neuroscience (not offered in 2022‐23)
PSYC 366 Cognitive Neuroscience (not offered in 2022‐23)
PSYC 367 Neuropsychology of Aging
PSYC 371 Evolutionary and Developmental Trends in Cognition (not offered in 2022‐23)
PSYC 375 Language and Deception (not offered in 2022‐23)

Cognitive Science Courses
CGSC 130 Revolutions in Mind: An Introduction to Cognitive Science An interdisciplinary study of the history
and current practice of the cognitive sciences. The course will draw on relevant work from diverse fields
such as artificial intelligence, cognitive psychology, philosophy, biology, and neuroscience. Topics to be
discussed include: scientific revolutions, the mind‐body problem, embodied cognition, perception,
representation, and the extended mind. 6 credits; SI; Winter; Jonathan R McKinney
CGSC 130 The Musical Mind: An Introduction to Cognitive Science An interdisciplinary examination of issues
concerning the mind and mental phenomena involved in the uniquely human activity of making and
understanding music. The course will draw on psychology, neuroscience, linguistics, computer science,

119
biology, and philosophy. Topics to be discussed include: the embodied cognition of rhythm; linguistic syntax
and musical structure; mental representations of musical sound and action; musical learning and
development; tone and beat deafness; and perfect pitch and neural plasticity. 6 credits; SI, WR2; Not
offered 2022‐23
CGSC 130 What Minds Are What They Do: An Introduction to Cognitive Science An interdisciplinary
examination of issues concerning the mind and mental phenomena. The course will draw on work from
diverse fields such as artificial intelligence, cognitive psychology, philosophy, linguistics, anthropology, and
neuroscience. Topics to be discussed include: the mind‐body problem, embodied cognition, perception,
representation, reasoning, and learning. 6 credits; SI, WR2; Fall; Jason A Decker
CGSC 232 Cognitive Processes Cross‐listed with PSYC 232. An introduction to the study of mental activity.
Topics include attention, pattern recognition and perception, memory, concept formation, categorization,
and cognitive development. Some attention to gender and individual differences in cognition, as well as
cultural settings for cognitive activities. A grade of C‐ or better must be earned in both
Psychology/Cognitive Science 232 and 233 to satisfy the LS requirement. Prerequisite: Psychology 110,
Cognitive Science 100, Cognitive Science 130 or instructor permission; concurrent registration in Cognitive
Science 233. 6 credits; WR2, LS; Fall, Spring; Kathleen M Galotti
CGSC 233 Laboratory in Cognitive Processes Cross‐listed with PSYC 233. Students will participate in the
replication and planning of empirical studies, collecting and analyzing data relevant to major cognitive
phenomena. A grade of C‐ or better must be earned in both Psychology/Cognitive Science 232 and 233 to
satisfy the LS requirement. Prerequisite: Concurrent registration in Cognitive Science 232; Psychology 110,
Cognitive Science 100, Cognitive Science 130 or permission of the instructor. 2 credits; LS, QRE; Fall, Spring;
Kathleen M Galotti
CGSC 236 Thinking, Reasoning, and Decision Making An examination of the way people think and reason,
both when given formal laboratory tasks and when facing problems and decisions in everyday life. Students
consider their own reasoning and decision making through course exercises. Topics include models of
formal reasoning, decision making, heuristics and biases in thinking and problem‐solving, moral reasoning,
improving skills of higher order cognition. Prerequisite: Psychology 110 or Cognitive Science 100 or 130. 6
credits; FSR, WR2; Winter; Kathleen M Galotti
CGSC 330 Embodied Cognition This seminar will consider recent work in philosophy, cognitive science and
linguistics critical of views of human cognition as "disembodied" and Cartesian. Philosophical sources of the
early critiques of symbolic AI and "cartesianism" will be considered (Merleau‐Ponty, Dewey), as will the
enactive (Cuffari, Di Paolo, and De Jaegher) and ecological (Chemero, Cowley, Steffensen) critiques of
language, and current work on embodied cognition by Eleanor Rosch, Hubert Dreyfus, John Haugeland,
Andy Clark and Evan Thompson. The seminar will include materials relevant to students in philosophy,
linguistics, psychology and cognitive science. Prerequisite: Cognitive Science 130, or Cognitive
Science/Psychology 232 or permission of the instructor. 6 credits; HI; Winter; Jonathan R McKinney
CGSC 336 Moral Thinking, Reasoning, and Decision Making In this seminar course we will examine how
children, adolescents, and adults confront moral dilemmas, reason about ethical issues, and decide on a
course of action when challenged by confounding questions. Topics include the development of moral
reasoning, gender difference in moral reasoning, socio‐cultural influences on moral reasoning, and how
moral issues intersect with other realms of decision making. We will examine work by Lawrence Kohlberg,
Carol Gilligan, Eliot Turiel, and Jonathan Haidt. As a seminar, the emphasis will be on discussion. Course
requirements include regular attendance and participation, preparing and leading class discussions, short

120
reaction/reflection papers, and a final paper. Prerequisite: Cognitive Science 130 or Cognitive Science 232,
236 or any 200‐level course in Psychology or Instructor Consent. 6 credits; SI; Not offered 2022‐23
CGSC 340 Phenomenology and Cognitive Science This course will provide an in‐depth study of
phenomenology, covering both its history and contemporary debates, and phenomenology‐inspired
research in cognitive science, psychology and neuroscience. Roughly half the course will be devoted to the
history of phenomenology, setting the main views within their historical context and explaining how these
views respond to the difficulties of their predecessors. The other half will discuss contemporary
philosophical debates and scientific research involving phenomenological approaches. Prerequisite:
Cognitive Science 130 required, 200 level Cognitive Science, Psychology or Philosophy course
recommended. 6 credits; HI; Not offered 2022‐23
CGSC 382 Cognitive Development in Children and Adolescents This seminar will focus on the cognitive
changes experienced by children in the preschool, elementary, and middle school years, in such realms as
perception, attention, memory, thinking, decision‐making, knowledge representation, and the acquisition
of academic skills. Weekly observation at local day care centers or schools will be a required course
component. The seminar will be discussion‐based and participants will take turns making presentations and
leading discussions. Prerequisite: Psychology 250, Cognitive Science 232, Psychology 232 or Intructor
consent. 6 credits; SI; Winter; Kathleen M Galotti
CGSC 386 Adolescent Cognitive Development: Developing an Identity and Life Plans An examination of
recent literature on how adolescents develop their value system, explore their goals, begin to make life‐
framing decisions, establish new relationships, and discover answers to the question "Who am I?" Course
readings will involve primary literature, and the course is discussion‐based. Prerequisite: Psychology 250,
Educational Studies 234 or consent of the instructor. 6 credits; SI; Not offered 2022‐23
CGSC 394 Collaborative Research in Cognitive Science This course will be centered around a collaborative
research project in cognitive science. Students enrolled will meet with the instructor to complete
background readings and discussions, then will create recruiting materials, consent forms, IRB applications,
debriefing statements, stimuli, and task instructions. They will then gather data from research participants
and participate in data entry, analysis, and writing up the results. This course may be repeated multiple
terms. Prerequisite: Cognitive Science 233 or Psychology 233. 2 credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐23
CGSC 396 Directed Research in Cognitive Studies Senior majors in cognitive studies will work with the
instructor to develop a thesis proposal for their comps project. Prerequisite: Cognitive Science 130,
Cognitive Science/Psychology 232/233 and Psychology 200/201 or Instructor Consent. 3 credits; NE; Fall;
Justin M London
CGSC 400 Integrative Exercise 3 credits; S/NC; Spring; Kathleen M Galotti

Computer Science
Computer Science studies the computational structures and processes that appear throughout the
natural and human worlds. The study of those processes (known as algorithms) can lend insight into
the functioning of our brains, the structure of our genes, the mechanisms by which people form
communities, and many other questions in a wide range of disciplines. At the same time, an
understanding of algorithms and the structure of data can help us create a tremendous variety of
useful software tools. Carleton's computer science curriculum is designed to provide students with a

121

balance between theoretical study and the practical application of theory to the design and
construction of software.
Since computer science plays a key role in our world, we recommend Introduction to Computer
Science (CS 111) for all Carleton students.
Those who choose to major in computer science find many opportunities following graduation.
Carleton Computer Science graduates who pursue employment in the computing industry find jobs
in many different roles and at a wide variety of companies. In addition to graduate programs in
computer science, Carleton CS majors seeking further education have pursued graduate study in
areas such as bioinformatics, linguistics, cognitive science, and law.
Requirements for the Computer Science Major
72 credits required for the major.
The course requirements are Mathematics 111; Computer Science 111, 201, 202, 208, 251, 252,
254, and 257; and twelve additional credits from Computer Science courses numbered 200 or above
(excluding independent study, senior seminar and comps). (Because the content of CS 202 and
Math 236 have sufficient overlap, we will accept Math 236 in lieu of the CS 202
requirement). Majors must complete a capstone experience (CS 399 and CS 400): during the senior
year, the student will participate on a team of four to seven students working on a faculty-specified
project. Potential majors should take Computer Science 111, Mathematics 111, and at least one of
Computer Science 201 and 202 by the end of the sophomore year.
Although only one mathematics course is required for the CS major, we encourage our students to
take mathematics and statistics courses beyond Mathematics 111. Students contemplating graduate
study should consider taking the full Calculus sequence plus Statistics 120 and Mathematics 232,
and additional computer science electives. Those interested in computer engineering should
consider taking physics courses through Electricity & Magnetism and Electronics.
Computer Science Courses
CS 099 Summer Computer Science Program Computer science is a rich academic field that seeks to
systematically study the processes for solving problems and untangle the complexities in the concrete
physical world and the abstract mathematical world. The Summer Liberal Arts Institute (SLAI) at Carleton
focuses on understanding how to think about these processes, how to program computers to implement
them, and how to apply computer science ideas to real problems of interest. 6 credits; Not offered 2022‐23
CS 100 The Internet: Protocols, Platforms, and People The internet is an essential technology that touches
virtually every aspect of our lives. Since its introduction in the early 80s, it has grown widely and
transformed how we work, learn, and communicate. How does this critical piece of global infrastructure
work, and how is it governed? What implications did its arrival have on how we interact with one another
and participate in society? In this course, we will explore topics related to the structure and origins of the
internet, the legal frameworks and business models that shape how we experience it, its transformation of
the public sphere, and its potential to both reduce and exacerbate inequalities. 6 credits; AI, WR1; Fall;
Sneha Narayan

122
CS 111 Introduction to Computer Science This course will introduce you to computer programming and the
design of algorithms. By writing programs to solve problems in areas such as image processing, text
processing, and simple games, you will learn about recursive and iterative algorithms, complexity analysis,
graphics, data representation, software engineering, and object‐oriented design. No previous programming
experience is necessary. Students who have received credit for Computer Science 201 or above are not
eligible to enroll in Computer Science 111. 6 credits; FSR, QRE; Fall, Winter, Spring; David R Musicant, Anya
E Vostinar, Richard Wells, Sneha Narayan, Amy Csizmar Dalal
CS 201 Data Structures Think back to your favorite assignment from Introduction to Computer Science. Did
you ever get the feeling that "there has to be a better/smarter way to do this problem"? The Data
Structures course is all about how to store information intelligently and access it efficiently. How can
Google take your query, compare it to billions of web pages, and return the answer in less than one
second? How can one store information so as to balance the competing needs for fast data retrieval and
fast data modification? To help us answer questions like these, we will analyze and implement stacks,
queues, trees, linked lists, graphs, and hash tables. Students who have received credit for a course for
which Computer Science 201 is a prerequisite are not eligible to enroll in Computer Science 201.
Prerequisite: Computer Science 111 or instructor permission. 6 credits; FSR, QRE; Fall, Winter, Spring;
Richard Wells, Kiran Tomlinson
CS 202 Mathematics of Computer Science This course introduces some of the formal tools of computer
science, using a variety of applications as a vehicle. You'll learn how to encode data so that when you
scratch the back of a DVD, it still plays just fine; how to distribute "shares" of your floor's PIN so that any
five of you can withdraw money from the floor bank account (but no four of you can); how to play chess;
and more. Topics that we'll explore along the way include: logic and proofs, number theory, elementary
complexity theory and recurrence relations, basic probability, counting techniques, and graphs.
Prerequisite: Computer Science 111 and Mathematics 111 or instructor permission. 6 credits; FSR; Fall,
Winter, Spring; Eric C Alexander, Kiran Tomlinson
CS 208 Introduction to Computer Systems Are you curious what's really going on when a computer runs
your code? In this course we will demystify the machine and the tools that we use to program it. Our broad
survey of how computer systems execute programs, store information, and communicate will focus on the
hardware/software interface, including data representation, instruction set architecture, the C
programming language, memory management, and the operating system process model. Prerequisite:
Computer Science 201 or instructor permission. 6 credits; FSR; Winter, Spring; Jeffrey R Ondich
CS 231 Computer Security Hackers, phishers, and spammers‐‐at best they annoy us, at worst they disrupt
communication systems, steal identities, bring down corporations, and compromise sensitive systems. In
this course, we'll study various aspects of computer and network security, focusing mainly on the technical
aspects as well as the social and cultural costs of providing (or not providing) security. Topics include
cryptography, authentication and identification schemes, intrusion detection, viruses and worms, spam
prevention, firewalls, denial of service, electronic commerce, privacy, and usability. Prerequisite: Computer
Science 201 or 202 or 208. 6 credits; FSR; Not offered 2022‐23
CS 232 Art, Interactivity, and Robotics In this hands‐on studio centered course, we'll explore and create
interactive three dimensional art. Using basic construction techniques, microprocessors, and programming,
this class brings together computer science, sculpture, engineering, and aesthetic design. Students will
engage the nuts‐and‐bolts of fabrication, learn to program microcontrollers, and study the design of
interactive constructions. Collaborative labs and individual projects will culminate in a campus wide
exhibition. No prior building experience is required. Prerequisite: Computer Science 111. Not open to

123
students who have taken previous offering of Art, Interactivity and Robotics. 6 credits; ARP; Not offered
2022‐23
CS 251 Programming Languages: Design and Implementation What makes a programming language like
"Python" or like "Java"? This course will look past superficial properties (like indentation) and into the soul
of programming languages. We will explore a variety of topics in programming language construction and
design: syntax and semantics, mechanisms for parameter passing, typing, scoping, and control structures.
Students will expand their programming experience to include other programming paradigms, including
functional languages like Scheme and ML. Prerequisite: Computer Science 201 or instructor permission. 6
credits; FSR; Fall, Winter; Anna N Rafferty, David R Musicant
CS 252 Algorithms A course on techniques used in the design and analysis of efficient algorithms. We will
cover several major algorithmic design paradigms (greedy algorithms, dynamic programming, divide and
conquer, and network flow). Along the way, we will explore the application of these techniques to a variety
of domains (natural language processing, economics, computational biology, and data mining, for example).
As time permits, we will include supplementary topics like randomized algorithms, advanced data
structures, and amortized analysis. Prerequisite: Computer Science 201 and Computer Science 202
(Mathematics 236 will be accepted in lieu of Computer Science 202). 6 credits; FSR; Fall, Winter, Spring;
Jeffrey R Ondich, Sneha Narayan, Eric C Alexander
CS 254 Computability and Complexity An introduction to the theory of computation. What problems can
and cannot be solved efficiently by computers? What problems cannot be solved by computers, period?
Topics include formal models of computation, including finite‐state automata, pushdown automata, and
Turing machines; formal languages, including regular expressions and context‐free grammars;
computability and uncomputability; and computational complexity, particularly NP‐completeness.
Prerequisite: Computer Science 201 and Computer Science 202 (Mathematics 236 will be accepted in lieu of
Computer Science 202). 6 credits; FSR; Fall, Winter, Spring; Josh R Davis, Anna N Rafferty
CS 257 Software Design It's easy to write a mediocre computer program, and lots of people do it. Good
programs are quite a bit harder to write, and are correspondingly less common. In this course, we will study
techniques, tools, and habits that will improve your chances of writing good software. While working on
several medium‐sized programming projects, we will investigate code construction techniques, debugging
and profiling tools, testing methodologies, UML, principles of object‐oriented design, design patterns, and
user interface design. Prerequisite: Computer Science 201 or instructor permission. 6 credits; FSR; Fall,
Winter, Spring; Jeffrey R Ondich, Anya E Vostinar, Amy Csizmar Dalal
CS 294 CS Tea Colloquium Students earn credit by attending at least five of the research‐based events in
the Computer Science department's weekly colloquium series. Speakers come from academia, industry,
nonprofits, and government, and present on a variety of topics, within and adjacent to computer science.
Students will submit brief written reports after each talk that they attend. Prerequisite: At least one CS
course (concurrent enrollment is allowed). 1 credit; S/CR/NC; NE; Fall, Winter, Spring; Anna N Rafferty
CS 298 Reading and Analysis Associated with External Computing Experience An independent study course
intended for students who require Curricular Practical Training (CPT) or Optional Practical Training (OPT) to
go with an external activity related to computer science (for example, an internship or an externship). The
student will choose and read academic material relating to a practical experience (e.g., internship), and
write a paper describing what the student learned from the reading, and how it related to the practical
experience. Prerequisite: Instructor's permission. 1 credit; S/CR/NC; NE; Fall, Winter, Spring; Eric C
Alexander

124
CS 301 History of Computing in England Program: History of Computing In the mid‐1800s, Charles
Babbage's analytical engine, inspired by programmable looms, was the first conception of an automated
programmable computing device. A century later, British researchers built some of the first physical
computers‐‐‐particularly WWII‐era code‐breaking work, and programmable machines developed
immediately after the war. We will explore those two eras, through historical writings (including Babbage
and Ada Lovelace, who wrote programs for the analytical engine, and Alan Turing) and visits to relevant
museums and archives. We will also study some of the more recent history of computing, particularly the
major advances in the 1960s and 1970s. Prerequisite: Computer Science 201 and 202 (Math 236 will be
accepted in lieu of Computer Science 202). 6 credits; FSR; Summer; David Liben‐Nowell
CS 304 Social Computing The last decade has seen a vast increase in the number of applications that
connect people with one another. This course presents an interdisciplinary introduction to social
computing, a field of study that explores how computational techniques and artifacts are used to support
and understand social interactions. We will examine a number of socio‐technical systems (such as wikis,
social media platforms, and citizen science projects), discuss the design principles used to build them, and
analyze how they help people mobilize and collaborate with one another. Assignments will involve
investigating datasets from online platforms and exploring current research in the field. Prerequisite:
Computer Science 201. 6 credits; FSR, QRE; Spring; Sneha Narayan
CS 311 Computer Graphics Scientific simulations, movies, and video games often incorporate computer‐
generated images of fictitious worlds. How are these worlds represented inside a computer? How are they
“photographed” to produce the images that we see? What performance constraints and design trade‐offs
come into play? In this course we learn the basic theory and methodology of three‐dimensional computer
graphics, including both triangle rasterization and ray tracing. Familiarity with vectors, matrices, and the C
programming language is recommended but not required. Prerequisite: Computer Science 201. 6 credits;
QRE, FSR; Fall; Josh R Davis
CS 312 Audio Programming Students will learn the basics of MIDI and Digital Audio programming using C++.
In the MIDI portion of the course, you’ll learn to record, play, and transform MIDI data. During the Digital
Audio portion of the course, you’ll learn the basics of audio synthesis: oscillators, envelopes, filters,
amplifiers, and FFT analysis. Weekly homework assignments, two quizzes, and two independent projects.
Prerequisite: Computer Science 201 or instructor permission. 6 credits; FSR; Not offered 2022‐23
CS 314 Data Visualization Understanding the wealth of data that surrounds us can be challenging. Luckily,
we have evolved incredible tools for finding patterns in large amounts of information: our eyes! Data
visualization is concerned with taking information and turning it into pictures to better communicate
patterns or discover new insights. It combines aspects of computer graphics, human‐computer interaction,
design, and perceptual psychology. In this course, we will learn the different ways in which data can be
expressed visually and which methods work best for which tasks. Using this knowledge, we will critique
existing visualizations as well as design and build new ones. Prerequisite: Computer Science 201. 6 credits;
FSR, QRE; Spring; Eric C Alexander
CS 318 Computational Media How does computation enable new forms of creative expression? What kinds
of media artifacts and experiences can only happen on computers? In this course, we'll explore these
notions through a hands‐on survey of various forms of computational media, such as: computer simulation,
computer‐generated visual art, poetry generation, story generation, chatbots, Twitter bots, explorable
explanations, and more. For each topic in the survey, students will learn about the past, present, and future
of a given form through short readings and direct engagement with major works. Assignments and a final

125
project will center on the creation of novel media artifacts and also reimplementations of lost or defunct
historical programs. Prerequisite: Computer Science 111 or 201. 6 credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐23
CS 320 Machine Learning What does it mean for a machine to learn? Much of modern machine learning
focuses on identifying patterns in large datasets and using these patterns to make predictions about the
future. Machine learning has impacted a diverse array of applications and fields, from scientific discovery to
healthcare to education. In this artificial intelligence‐related course, we'll both explore a variety of machine
learning algorithms in different application areas, taking both theoretical and practical perspectives, and
discuss impacts and ethical implications of machine learning more broadly. Topics may vary, but typically
focus on regression and classification algorithms, including neural networks. Prerequisite: Computer
Science 201 and Computer Science 202 (Mathematics 236 will be accepted in lieu of Computer Science
202). 6 credits; FSR; Not offered 2022‐23
CS 321 Making Decisions with Artificial Intelligence There are many situations where computer systems
must make intelligent choices, from selecting actions in a game, to suggesting ways to distribute scarce
resources for monitoring endangered species, to a search‐and‐rescue robot learning to interact with its
environment. Artificial intelligence offers multiple frameworks for solving these problems. While popular
media attention has often emphasized supervised machine learning, this course instead engages with a
variety of other approaches in artificial intelligence, both established and cutting edge. These include
intelligent search strategies, game playing approaches, constrained decision making, reinforcement
learning from experience, and more. Coursework includes problem solving and programming. Prerequisite:
Computer Science 201. Additionally Computer Science 202 is strongly recommended. 6 credits; FSR;
Winter; David R Musicant
CS 322 Natural Language Processing Computers are poor conversationalists, despite decades of attempts to
change that fact. This course will provide an overview of the computational techniques developed in the
attempt to enable computers to interpret and respond appropriately to ideas expressed using natural
languages (such as English or French) as opposed to formal languages (such as C++ or Lisp). Topics in this
course will include parsing, semantic analysis, machine translation, dialogue systems, and statistical
methods in speech recognition. Prerequisite: Computer Science 201 and Computer Science 202
(Mathematics 236 will be accepted in lieu of Computer Science 202). 6 credits; FSR, QRE; Not offered 2022‐
23
CS 330 Introduction to Real‐Time Systems How can we prove that dynamic cruise control will brake quickly
enough if traffic suddenly stops? How must a system coordinate processes to detect pedestrians and other
vehicles to ensure fair sharing of computing resources? In real‐time systems, we explore scheduling
questions like these, which require provable guarantees of timing constraints for applications including
autonomous vehicles. This course will start by considering such questions for uniprocessor machines, both
when programs have static priorities and when priorities can change over time. We will then explore
challenges introduced by modern computers with multiple processors. We will consider both theoretical
and practical perspectives. Prerequisite: Computer Science 201 and Computer Science 202 (Mathematics
236 will be accepted in lieu of Computer Science 202). 6 credits; FSR; Not offered 2022‐23
CS 331 Computer Networks The Internet is composed of a large number of heterogeneous, independently‐
operating computer networks that work together to transport all sorts of data to points all over the world.
The fact that it does this so well given its complexity is a minor miracle. In this class, we'll study the
structure of these individual networks and of the Internet, and figure out how this "magic" takes place.
Topics include TCP/IP, protocols and their implementations, routing, security, network architecture, DNS,

126
peer‐to‐peer networking, and Wi‐Fi along with ethical and privacy issues. Prerequisite: Computer Science
201 or instructor permission. 6 credits; FSR; Winter, Spring; Amy Csizmar Dalal
CS 332 Operating Systems If you're working in the lab, you might be editing a file while waiting for a
program to compile. Meanwhile, the on‐screen clock ticks, a program keeps watch for incoming e‐mail, and
other users can log onto your machine from elsewhere in the network. Not only that, but if you write a
program that reads from a file on the hard drive, you are not expected to concern yourself with turning on
the drive's motor or moving the read/write arms to the proper location over the disk's surface.
Coordinating all this hardware and software is the job of the operating system. In this course we will study
the fundamentals of operating system design, including the operating system kernel, scheduling and
concurrency, memory management, and file systems. Prerequisite: Computer Science 201 and 208 or
instructor permission. 6 credits; FSR; Not offered 2022‐23
CS 334 Database Systems Database systems are used in almost every aspect of computing, from storing
data for websites to maintaining financial information for large corporations. Intrinsically, what is a
database system and how does it work? This course takes a two‐pronged approach to studying database
systems. From a systems perspective, we will look at the low‐level details of how a database system works
internally, studying such topics as file organization, indexing, sorting techniques, and query optimization.
From a theory perspective, we will examine the fundamental ideas behind database systems, such as
normal forms and relational algebra. Prerequisite: Computer Science 201 or consent of the instructor. 6
credits; FSR; Not offered 2022‐23
CS 338 Computer Security When hackers can disable gas pipelines, national hospital systems, and electrical
grids, and data brokers can create a largely unregulated world‐wide surveillance system, there's a clear
need for people who understand the mechanisms of computer security and insecurity. Towards that end, in
this course we will study technical and social aspects of computer and network security. Topics will include
threat modeling, cryptography, secure network protocols, web security, ethical hacking and penetration
testing, authentication, authorization, historical hacking incidents, usability, privacy, and security‐related
law. Prerequisite: Computer Science 201. 6 credits; FSR; Not offered 2022‐23
CS 341 History of Computing in England Program: Cryptography Modern cryptographic systems allow
parties to communicate in a secure way, even if they don't trust the channels over which they are
communicating (or maybe even each other). Cryptography is at the heart of a huge range of applications:
online banking and shopping, password‐protected computer accounts, and secure wireless networks, to
name just a few. In this course, we will introduce and explore some fundamental cryptographic primitives.
Topics will include public‐key encryption, digital signatures, code‐breaking techniques (like those used at
Bletchley Park during WWII to break the Enigma machine's cryptosystem), pseudorandom number
generation, and other cryptographic applications. Prerequisite: Computer Science 201 and 202.
(Mathematics 236 will be accepted in lieu of CS 202). 6 credits; FSR, QRE; Summer; David Liben‐Nowell
CS 344 Human‐Computer Interaction The field of human‐computer interaction addresses two fundamental
questions: how do people interact with technology, and how can technology enhance the human
experience? In this course, we will explore technology through the lens of the end user: how can we design
effective, aesthetically pleasing technology, particularly user interfaces, to satisfy user needs and improve
the human condition? How do people react to technology and learn to use technology? What are the social,
societal, health, and ethical implications of technology? The course will focus on design methodologies,
techniques, and processes for developing, testing, and deploying user interfaces. Prerequisite: Computer
Science 201 or instructor permission. 6 credits; FSR, QRE; Not offered 2022‐23

127
CS 348 Parallel and Distributed Computing As multi‐core machines become more prevalent, different
programming paradigms have emerged for harnessing extra processors for better performance. This course
explores parallel computation (programs that run on more than one core) as well as the related problem of
distributed computation (programs that run on more than one machine). In particular, we will explore the
two major paradigms for parallel programming, shared‐memory multi‐threading and message‐passing, and
the advantages and disadvantages of each. Other possible topics include synchronization mechanisms,
debugging concurrent programs, fork/join parallelism, the theory of parallelism and concurrency, parallel
algorithms, cloud computing, and Map/Reduce. Prerequisite: Computer Science 201. 6 credits; FSR; Spring;
David R Musicant
CS 352 Advanced Algorithms A second course on designing and analyzing efficient algorithms to solve
computational problems. We will survey some algorithmic design techniques that apply broadly throughout
computer science, including discussion of wide‐ranging applications. A sampling of potential topics:
approximation algorithms (can we efficiently compute near‐optimal solutions even when finding exact
solutions is computationally intractable?); randomized algorithms (does flipping coins help in designing
faster/simpler algorithms?); online algorithms (how do we analyze an algorithm that needs to make
decisions before the entire input arrives?); advanced data structures; complexity theory. As time and
interest permit, we will mix recently published algorithmic papers with classical results. Prerequisite:
Computer Science 252 or instructor permission. 6 credits; FSR; Not offered 2022‐23
CS 358 Quantum Computing Quantum computing is a promising technology that may (or may not)
revolutionize computer science over the next few decades. By exploiting quantum phenomena such as
superposition and entanglement, quantum computers can solve problems in a fundamentally different way
from that of conventional computers. This course surveys the computer science and mathematics of
quantum algorithms, including Shor's and Grover's algorithms, error correction, and cryptography. No prior
experience with quantum theory is needed. Prerequisite: Computer Science 201, Mathematics 232, and
Computer Science 202 (Mathematics 236 will be accepted in lieu of Computer Science 202). 6 credits; FSR;
Not offered 2022‐23
CS 361 Artificial Life and Digital Evolution The field of artificial life seeks to understand the dynamics of life
by separating them from the substrate of DNA. In this course, we will explore how we can implement the
dynamics of life in software to test and generate biological hypotheses, with a particular focus on evolution.
Topics will include the basic principles of biological evolution, transferring experimental evolution
techniques to computational systems, cellular automata, computational modeling, and digital evolution. All
students will be expected to complete and present a term research project recreating and extending recent
work in the field of artificial life. Prerequisite: Computer Science 201. 6 credits; FSR; Fall; Anya E Vostinar
CS 362 Computational Biology Recent advances in high‐throughput experimental techniques have
revolutionized how biologists measure DNA, RNA and protein. The size and complexity of the resulting
datasets have led to a new era where computational methods are essential to answering important
biological questions. This course focuses on the process of transforming biological problems into well
formed computational questions and the algorithms to solve them. Topics include approaches to sequence
comparison and alignment; molecular evolution and phylogenetics; DNA/RNA sequencing and assembly;
and specific disease applications including cancer genomics. Prerequisite: Computer Science 201 and
Computer Science 202 (Mathematics 236 will be accepted in lieu of Computer Science 202). 6 credits; FSR,
QRE; Not offered 2022‐23
CS 399 Senior Seminar As part of their senior capstone experience, majors will work together in teams
(typically four to seven students per team) on faculty‐specified topics to design and implement the first

128
stage of a project. Required of all senior majors. Prerequisite: Senior standing. Students are strongly
encouraged to complete Computer Science 252 and Computer Science 257 before starting Computer
Science 399. 3 credits; S/CR/NC; NE; Fall, Winter; Amy Csizmar Dalal, Sneha Narayan, Eric C Alexander, Anna
N Rafferty, Jeffrey R Ondich
CS 400 Integrative Exercise Beginning with the prototypes developed in the Senior Seminar, project teams
will complete their project and present it to the department. Required of all senior majors. Prerequisite:
Computer Science 399. 3 credits; S/NC; Fall, Winter; Anna N Rafferty, Amy Csizmar Dalal, Eric C Alexander,
Sneha Narayan, Jeffrey R Ondich

Cross-Cultural Studies
In our courses, Cross-Cultural Studies means comparing and contrasting two or more cultures in
order to identify phenomena that are more universal or more culturally specific, as well as
examining outcomes when two or more culturally different groups interact. In the minor, we engage
in both trans-cultural and intercultural work through a blend of personal experience, reflection,
theory, and analysis.
Requirements for the Cross Cultural Studies Minor
The minor consists of a minimum of 36 credits, at least 12 of which are at the 200-level, distributed
across the following categories (with no courses applied to more than one category):




a. Seeing and Being Cross‐Cultural (minimum of 6 credits):
o AMST 115 Introduction to American Studies
o CCST 100 Growing up Cross‐Culturally
o CCST 100 Cross Cultural Perspectives on Israeli and Palestinian Identity
o RELG 110 Understanding Religion
o SOAN 110 Introduction to Anthropology
o SOAN 111 Introduction to Sociology
b. Reflecting on Cross‐Cultural Experience (minimum of 4 credits):
o CCST 208 International Coffee and News
o CCST 270 Creative Travel Writing Workshop
o IDSC 103 Student Conversations about Diversity and Community
o IDSC 203 Talking about Diversity (not offered in 2022‐23)
(Certain OCS program courses may also apply to this category. CCST 208 can be retaken once, for a
total of four credits)



c. Principles of Cross‐Cultural Analysis (minimum of 12 credits, no more than 6 from any one
program):
o CCST 180 Crossing Borders: Global Contexts of Migration and Immigration (not offered in
2022‐23)
o CCST 275 I'm A Stranger Here Myself (not offered in 2022‐23)
o GWSS 398 Capstone: Transnational Feminist Activism (not offered in 2022‐23)
o LCST 245 The Critical Toolbox: Who's Afraid of Theory?
o POSC 120 Democracy and Dictatorship
o POSC 215 Comparative Political Communication: News Coverage of Elections

129
o
o
o
o
o
o
o



POSC 247 Comparative Nationalism (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 358 Comparative Social Movements*
PSYC 248 Cross‐Cultural Psychology (not offered in 2022‐23)
PSYC 358 Cross‐Cultural Psychology Seminar in Prague: Psychopathology
RELG 300 Theories and Methods in the Study of Religion
SOAN 330 Sociological Thought and Theory
SOAN 331 Anthropological Thought and Theory
d. Cross‐Cultural Encounters (minimum of 12 credits): Can include, with approval of director, any
course dealing substantively with the intersection of two or more cultures—including but not
limited to:
o ARBC 286 Narratives of Arab Modernity (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ASLN 111 Writing Systems (not offered in 2022‐23)
o CAMS 218 Contemporary Global Cinemas
o ENGL 238 African Literature in English (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 250 Indian Fiction 1880‐1980 (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 251 Contemporary Indian Fiction (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 252 Caribbean Fiction (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 350 The Postcolonial Novel: Forms and Contexts
o FREN 206 Contemporary French and Francophone Culture
o FREN 245 Francophone Literature of Africa and the Caribbean
o FREN 255 Paris Program: Islam in France: Historical Approaches and Current Debates
o FREN 259 Paris Program: Hybrid Paris
o FREN 350 Middle East and French Connection (not offered in 2022‐23)
o FREN 359 Paris Program: Hybrid Paris
o FREN 360 The Algerian War of Liberation and Its Representations (not offered in 2022‐23)
o HIST 141 Europe in the Twentieth Century (not offered in 2022‐23)
o HIST 165 From Young Turks to Arab Revolutions: A Cultural History of the Modern Middle
East (not offered in 2022‐23)
o HIST 184 Colonial West Africa (not offered in 2022‐23)
o HIST 232 Renaissance Worlds in France and Italy (not offered in 2022‐23)
o HIST 254 Colonialism in East Asia
o HIST 260 The Making of the Modern Middle East (not offered in 2022‐23)
o HIST 266 History of Islam in South Asia (not offered in 2022‐23)
o HIST 270 Nuclear Nations: India and Pakistan as Rival Siblings
o HIST 281 War in Modern Africa (not offered in 2022‐23)
o HIST 360 Muslims and Modernity
o MELA 121 East‐West in Israeli and Palestinian Fiction and Film (not offered in 2022‐23)
o MELA 230 Jewish Collective Memory
o POSC 215 Comparative Political Communication: News Coverage of Elections
o POSC 238 Sport & Globalization London/Seville Pgm: Globalization and Development:
Lessons from Int'l Football (not offered in 2022‐23)
o POSC 247 Comparative Nationalism (not offered in 2022‐23)
o POSC 265 Public Policy and Global Capitalism
o POSC 268 Global Environmental Politics and Policy
o POSC 294 Central and Eastern European Politics Program: Perceptions of Otherness in
Modern Eastern and Central Europe
o POSC 295 Central and Eastern European Politics Program: Nation‐Building in Central and
Eastern Europe between Politics and Art
o POSC 296 Central and Eastern European Politics Program: Challenges to the Nation‐State in
Eastern and Central Europe: Immigrants and Minorities

130
o
o
o



POSC 348 Strangers, Foreigners and Exiles*
POSC 358 Comparative Social Movements*
POSC 378 Political Economy & Ecology of Southeast Asia: Social Changes in Southeast Asia
(not offered in 2022‐23)
o POSC 379 Political Economy and Ecology of S.E. Asia: Diversity of Social Ecological Systems
in Southeast Asia (not offered in 2022‐23)
o RELG 110 Understanding Religion
o RELG 155 Hinduism: An Introduction
o RELG 213 Religion, Medicine, and Healing
o RELG 227 Liberation Theologies (not offered in 2022‐23)
o RELG 234 Angels, Demons, and Evil
o RELG 237 Yoga: Religion, History, Practice (not offered in 2022‐23)
o RELG 254 Zen Buddhism
o RELG 287 Many Marys (not offered in 2022‐23)
o RELG 289 Global Religions in Minnesota (not offered in 2022‐23)
o RUSS 205 Russian in Cultural Contexts
o RUSS 261 Lolita (not offered in 2022‐23)
o SOAN 108 In & Out of Africa: How Transnational Black Lives Matter (not offered in 2022‐23)
o SOAN 256 Africa: Representation and Conflict
o SPAN 242 Introduction to Latin American Literature
e. Capstone (2 credits). CCST 398: Cross‐Cultural Panorama: A Capstone Workshop. After
participating in selected co‐curricular activities, students will curate work from their CCST courses
and experiences in an instructor‐guided e‐portfolio, including a reflective essay. (Other capstone
options may be approved by director.)

Participation in at least one OCS program, while not required, is strongly encouraged. Courses from
OCS programs may be applied to categories A through E, with approval of the director (and subject
to rules of the Registrar).
Cross‐Cultural Studies Courses
CCST 100 Cross Cultural Perspectives on Israeli and Palestinian Identity How have Jewish and Palestinian
citizens of Israel shaped their senses of personal and collective identity since the early twentieth century?
We will explore mental pictures of the land, one's self, and others in a selection of Israeli Jewish and
Palestinian short stories, novels, and films. We will also explore some of the humanistic roots of U.S.
involvement in Israeli‐Palestinian relations today, particularly in the realm of American initiated bi‐cultural
youth camps such as Seeds of Peace. Students will enrich our class focus by introducing us to perspectives
on Israel/Palestine in their home countries or elsewhere. In translation. 6 credits; AI, WR1, IS; Fall; Stacy N
Beckwith
CCST 100 Growing up Cross‐Culturally First‐year students interested in this program should enroll in this
seminar. The course is recommended but not required for the minor and it will count as one of the
electives. From cradle to grave, cultural assumptions shape our own sense of who we are. This course is
designed to enable American and international students to compare how their own and other societies
view birth, infancy, adolescence, marriage, adulthood, and old age. Using children's books, child‐rearing
manuals, movies, and ethnographies, we will explore some of the assumptions in different parts of the
globe about what it means to "grow up." 6 credits; AI, WR1, IS; Fall; Stephanie M Cox
CCST 180 Crossing Borders: Global Contexts of Migration and Immigration This course will grapple with the
issue of immigration and migration from both global and interdisciplinary perspectives. Through several

131
different case studies (including such regions as the Americas, Africa, Europe, and more), taught by faculty
from different departments, students will gain a deeper understanding of one of the burning issues of our
time. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
CCST 208 International Coffee and News Have you just returned from Asia, Africa, Europe, or South
America? This course is an excellent way to keep in touch with the culture (and, when appropriate, the
language) you left behind. Relying on magazines and newspapers around the world, students will discuss
common topics and themes representing a wide array of regions. You may choose to read the press in the
local language, or read English‐language media about your region, meeting once each week for
conversational exchange. (Language of conversation is English.) Prerequisite: Students must have
participated in an off‐campus study program (Carleton or non‐Carleton) or instructor permission. 2 credits;
S/CR/NC; HI, IS; Fall, Winter, Spring; Luciano H Battaglini, David G Tompkins, Scott D Carpenter
CCST 270 Creative Travel Writing Workshop Travelers write. Whether it be in the form of postcards, text
messages, blogs, or articles, writing serves to anchor memory and process difference, making foreign
experience understandable to us and accessible to others. While examining key examples of the genre, you
will draw on your experiences off‐campus for your own work. Student essays will be critiqued in a
workshop setting, and all work will be revised before final submission. Some experimentation with blended
media is also encouraged. Prerequisite: Students must have participated in an off‐campus study program
(Carleton or non‐Carleton) or instructor permission. 6 credits; S/CR/NC; ARP, WR2, IS; Winter; Scott D
Carpenter
CCST 275 I'm A Stranger Here Myself What do enculturation, tourism, culture shock, "going native," haptics,
cross‐cultural adjustment, and third culture kids have in common? How do intercultural transitions shape
identity? What is intercultural competence? This course explores theories about intercultural contact and
tests their usefulness by applying them to the analysis of world literature, case studies, and the visual arts,
and by employing students' intercultural experiences as evidence. From individualized, self‐reflective
exercises to community‐oriented group endeavors, our activities will promote new intercultural paradigms
in the classroom and the wider community. Course designed for off‐campus returnees, students who have
lived abroad, or who have experienced being outsiders. 6 credits; SI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
CCST 398 The Cross‐Cultural Panorama: A Capstone Workshop The work of Cross‐Cultural Studies traverses
many disciplines, often engaging with experiences that are difficult to capture in traditional formats. In this
course students will create an ePortfolio that reflects, deepens, and narrates the various forms of cross‐
cultural experience they have had at Carleton, drawing on coursework and off‐campus study, as well
as such extra‐curricular activities as talks, service learning, internships and fellowships. Guided by readings
and prompts, students will write a reflective essay articulating the coherence of the parts, describing both
the process and the results of their pathway through the minor. Considered a capstone for CCST, but for
anyone looking to thread together their experiences across culture. Course is taught as a workshop. 2
credits; S/CR/NC; HI, IS; Winter; David G Tompkins

Digital Arts and Humanities Minor
The Digital Arts and Humanities (DGAH) interdisciplinary minor provides students with a
framework for studying, understanding, and actively participating in the integration of new digital
methods, arts & humanities academic research and creative production. The evolving field of
Digital Humanities uses digital tools and computational methods to enhance arts and humanities
research and production, while also using traditional humanistic approaches to interrogate the

132

impact of digital technologies. Bridging traditional divides between the humanities, arts, and
computational sciences, the minor in Digital Arts and Humanities emphasizes multidisciplinary
collaboration and experimentation while encouraging students to both practice and critically reflect
on digital creation and interpretation. Students in the DGAH minor will learn to critically evaluate
and creatively employ digital media, engage with emergent research questions related to digital
culture and practices, and develop the skills that constitute digital fluency in the twenty-first
century.
Learning Goals: Students who pursue a DGAH minor will:
1. Demonstrate proficiency in several disparate digital arts and humanities competencies (e.g. digital
communication; data management, analysis and presentation; critical making, design and
development)
2. Learn to reflect critically on the intersection between digital media and methodologies and non‐
digital materials and texts
3. Demonstrate an understanding of the social, cultural, political and ethical implications of digital
technologies, scholarship, and artistic production
4. Gain hands‐on experience with collaborative, creative, and interdisciplinary digital projects and
demonstrate an ability to work both individually and in group settings

Requirements for the Minor
Students must complete at least 44 credits to complete the minor, including an introductory theory
and methods course (6 credits) and capstone Digital Arts and Humanities ePortfolio seminar (2
credits).
The remaining 36 credits are drawn from a range of courses that foster digital skills, critical
reflection on digital scholarship, and collaborative practices transferable across disciplines. At least
6 credits must be taken from each category (B, C, and D), and at least 12 credits must be at the 200level or above. Students are strongly encouraged to explore different disciplines and the connections
between them in the course of their study, and at least 12 credits must come from courses
designated Arts Practice, Humanistic Inquiry or Literary/Artistic Analysis. No more than 12
elective credits may come from any one department and no more than 12 credits may count toward
both the student's major and the DGAH minor.
A. Core Courses (6 credits)
The core courses introduce students to a broad range of digital methodologies and promote critical
reflection on their digital project work in a collaborative setting.




DGAH 110 Hacking the Humanities (6 credits) Offered annually, this course features a general
introduction to the methods and implications of digital scholarship, as well as hands‐on
collaborative project work.
ENGL 285 Textual Technologies from Parchment to Pixel (6 credits) Offered annually, this course
introduces students to the history and the future of the book, including theories of and hands‐on
practice with writing, manuscripts, books, printing, and digital media.

B. Skill Building in Digital Media and Methodologies (at least 6 credits)

133

These courses teach fundamental skills of digital production or analysis including hardware,
software, and methods that are widely transferable across the arts and humanities.










ARCN 246 Archaeological Methods & Lab
CAMS 111 Digital Foundations
CS 111 Introduction to Computer Science
ENTS 120 Introduction to Geospatial Analysis & Lab
HIST 200 Historians for Hire
MUSC 108 Introduction to Music Technology
STAT 120 Introduction to Statistics
STAT 220 Introduction to Data Science
STAT 250 Introduction to Statistical Inference




For students that place out of CS 111, CS 201
Or, Introduction to Statistics equivalent, PSYC 200/201, SOAN 239

C. Critical and Ethical Reflection on Digital Scholarship (at least 6 credits)
Courses that directly engage with the implications of digital technologies and teach students to be
critical consumers and producers of digital media.





















ARTS 339 Advanced Photography (not offered in 2022‐23)
CAMS 187 Cult Television and Fan Cultures (not offered in 2022‐23)
CAMS 214 Film History III
CAMS 246 Documentary Studies
CAMS 257 Video Games and Identity (not offered in 2022‐23)
CAMS 330 Cinema Studies Seminar
CAMS 340 Television Studies Seminar
CHIN 239 Digital China: Media, Culture, and Society (not offered in 2022‐23)
CHIN 240 Chinese Cinema in Translation (not offered in 2022‐23)
CS 314 Data Visualization
CS 344 Human‐Computer Interaction (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 362 Narrative Theory
LCST 245 The Critical Toolbox: Who's Afraid of Theory?
MUSC 208 Computer Music and Sound
POSC 214 Visual Representations of Political Thought and Action
POSC 217 Monuments, Museums & Meaning: How Politics Shapes Memory in Artifacts (not offered
in 2022‐23)
SPAN 209 Radio and News in Spanish (not offered in 2022‐23)
SPAN 244 Spain Today: Recent Changes through Narrative and Film
SPAN 345 Culture, Capitalism and the Commons
THEA 320 Live Performance and Digital Media (not offered in 2022‐23)

D. Cross-disciplinary Collaboration in Digital Projects (at least 6 credits)
Courses that emphasize hands-on, experiential learning by creating digital projects that cross
traditional disciplinary boundaries or engage authentically with community partners and public
audiences.

134

















ARCN 222 Experimental Archaeology and Experiential History
ARTS 252 Metalsmithing: Ancient Techniques, New Technologies
CS 232 Art, Interactivity, and Robotics (not offered in 2022‐23)
CS 318 Computational Media (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 265 News Stories
HIST 210 The Boston Massacre in 3D: Mapping, Modeling and Serious Gaming (not offered in 2022‐
23)
HIST 231 Mapping the World Before Mercator
HIST 238 The Viking World (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 245 Ireland: Land, Conflict and Memory (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 246 Making Early Medieval England
HIST 272 Music and Movement in Atlantic World History (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 338 Digital History, Public Heritage & Deep Mapping
MUSC 221 Electronic Music Composition
RELG 243 Native American Religious Freedom
RELG 289 Global Religions in Minnesota (not offered in 2022‐23)
SOAN 314 Contemporary Issues in Critical Criminology (not offered in 2022‐23)

E. Senior Capstone Experience (2 credits)


DGAH 398 Digital Arts & Humanities Portfolio: A Capstone Seminar (2 credits) In this advanced
capstone seminar, seniors will create an instructor‐guided ePortfolio that curates and critically
reflects on the digital experiences in, and products of, courses taken for the minor. If appropriate,
this may also highlight digital components of a comps project.

Students may count--with prior approval of both the course instructor and the minor coordinators-other advanced courses (200 or 300 level) in which the minor makes significant use of digital
technology to produce a research project or creative product. Additional courses that engage
substantially with a significant number of the DGAH learning goals may also be added to this list at
the director's discretion in consultation with the committee. Courses from OCS programs,
independent studies and LACOL Consortium summer courses may be submitted for consideration,
but no more than six OCS credits may count towards the minor. For two-credit trailing courses and
digital labs that require co-registration, only the digital component will be counted. Repeatable twocredit public outreach courses may be counted for up to six credits.
Digital Arts & Humanities Courses
DGAH 110 Hacking the Humanities The digital world is infiltrating the academy and profoundly disrupting
the arts and humanities, posing fundamental challenges to traditional models of university education,
scholarly research, academic publication and creative production. This core course for the Digital Arts &
Humanities minor introduces the key concepts, debates and technologies that shape DGAH, including text
encoding, digital mapping (GIS), network analysis, data visualization, 3D imaging and basic programming
languages. Students will learn to hack the humanities by making a collaborative, publishable DH project,
while acquiring the skills and confidence necessary to actively participate in the digital world, both in
college and beyond. 6 credits; HI, QRE; Fall, Winter; Austin P Mason
DGAH 398 Digital Arts & Humanities Portfolio: A Capstone Seminar The work of Digital Arts & Humanities
takes place at the crossroads of computing, humanities, and creative production. While digital tools and
computational methods can enhance humanities research and artistic production, traditional humanistic
approaches must also question digital technologies. Both the processes and products of this work stretch

135
the boundaries of familiar academic formats. In this course, students will create an ePortfolio that curates
and critically reflects on the digital processes and products of courses and co‐curricular experiences at
Carleton, guided by readings on the current state of interdisciplinary digital scholarship. A capstone for the
DGAH minor, the seminar will include numerous workshop events and culminate in public portfolio
presentations. Prerequisite: Prior digital arts and humanities course work, including but not limited to core
DGAH courses. 2 credits; NE; Spring; Austin P Mason

East Asian Studies
With the world's most populous nation and some of its largest economies, East Asia is a region of
growing significance. It consists of areas encompassed by present day China, Japan, and Korea (and
sometimes also Mongolia, Myanmar, Siberia, and Vietnam). The minor consists of a program of
study combining language training, off-campus study, required core courses in various disciplines,
and supporting courses, including a designated capstone course. The underlying logic of the minor
seeks to highlight both the similarities and differences in the societies and cultures of East Asia and
to generate increased understanding of a vital part of the modern world.
Requirements for the East Asian Studies Minor
The East Asian Studies Minor requires a total of 42 credits, with at least 6 credits drawn from each
of the three Asian Studies distribution areas (Literary/Artistic Analysis, Humanistic Inquiry or
Social Inquiry).
18 credits in core courses, drawn from at least two of the three Asian Studies distribution areas.
24 credits from additional courses, drawn from at least two of the three Asian Studies distribution
areas, and including a designated East Asia-related capstone course.
Courses taken on off-campus programs may be applied to the minor.
Normally, at least one term of off-campus study in East Asia.
One year of study of an East Asian language, or its equivalent. For languages offered at Carleton,
this will involve completion of a language through 103, or its equivalent. For languages not offered
at Carleton, it will involve completion of the equivalent of 103.
Core Courses: 18 credits from among the following; courses must be from at least two distribution
areas.










ARTH 165 Japanese Art and Culture (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARTH 166 Chinese Art and Culture
ARTH 267 Gardens in China and Japan
ARTH 321 Arts of the Chinese Scholar's Studio (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 150 Politics of Art in Early Imperial China
HIST 152 History of Early China (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 153 History of Modern China (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 156 History of Modern Korea (not offered in 2022‐23)
JAPN 231 Tradition and Modernity: Japanese Cinema in Translation (not offered in 2022‐23)

136




JAPN 245 Modern Japanese Literature and Manga in Translation (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 152 Religions in Japanese Culture
RELG 153 Introduction to Buddhism

Supporting Courses: 24 credits from among the following; courses must be from at least two
distribution areas.









































ARTH 165 Japanese Art and Culture (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARTH 166 Chinese Art and Culture
ARTH 209 Chinese Painting (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARTH 220 The Origins of Manga: Japanese Prints
ARTH 266 Arts of the Japanese Tea Ceremony (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARTH 267 Gardens in China and Japan
ARTH 321 Arts of the Chinese Scholar's Studio (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARTS 236 Ceramics: Vessels for Tea (not offered in 2022‐23)
ASLN 111 Writing Systems (not offered in 2022‐23)
ASST 283 Japanese History and Culture (not offered in 2022‐23)
ASST 284 Japanese Linguistics in Kyoto Seminar: History and Culture of Japan
CHIN 240 Chinese Cinema in Translation (not offered in 2022‐23)
CHIN 251 Heroes, Heroines, Exceptional Lives in Chinese Biographical Histories (not offered in 2022‐
23)
CHIN 347 Advanced Chinese: Reading the News (not offered in 2022‐23)
CHIN 348 Advanced Chinese: The Mass Media (not offered in 2022‐23)
CHIN 350 Reading Chinese Comics
CHIN 355 Contemporary Chinese Short Stories
CHIN 360 Classical Chinese
CHIN 361 Advanced Chinese: Readings in Twentieth Century Literature (not offered in 2022‐23)
CHIN 362 Advanced Chinese: Traditional Culture in Modern Language (not offered in 2022‐23)
CHIN 364 Chinese Classic Tales and Modern Adaptation (not offered in 2022‐23)
DANC 265 Performing the Orient
ECON 240 Microeconomics of Development
HIST 150 Politics of Art in Early Imperial China
HIST 154 Social Movements in Postwar Japan (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 156 History of Modern Korea (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 159 Disaster, Disease, & Rumors in East Asia (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 215 Carleton in the Archives: Carleton in China (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 254 Colonialism in East Asia
HIST 255 Rumors, Gossip, and News in East Asia (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 256 Disaster, Disease, & Rumors in East Asia (not offered in 2022‐23)
JAPN 206 Japanese in Cultural Context
JAPN 231 Tradition and Modernity: Japanese Cinema in Translation (not offered in 2022‐23)
JAPN 244 The World of Anime in Translation (not offered in 2022‐23)
JAPN 245 Modern Japanese Literature and Manga in Translation (not offered in 2022‐23)
JAPN 249 Introduction to Contemporary Japan and Literature
JAPN 254 World of Japanese Manga in Translation
JAPN 344 Japan Trends: Lifestyle, Society, and Culture
JAPN 345 Advanced Reading in Modern Japanese Literature: The Short Story
JAPN 353 Thinking about Environmental Issues in Japanese (not offered in 2022‐23)

137
















LING 285 Japanese Linguistics in Kyoto Seminar: The Linguistics of the Japanese Writing System
LING 286 Japanese Linguistics in Kyoto Seminar: The Structure of Japanese
MUSC 182 Chinese Musical Instruments
MUSC 182J Chinese Musical Instruments (Juried)
MUSC 213 J‐Pop: Listening to Music in Modern Japan
MUSC 282 Chinese Musical Instruments
MUSC 282J Chinese Musical Instruments (Juried)
POSC 264 Politics of Contemporary China
POSC 378 Political Economy & Ecology of Southeast Asia: Social Changes in Southeast Asia (not
offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 379 Political Economy and Ecology of S.E. Asia: Diversity of Social Ecological Systems in
Southeast Asia (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 153 Introduction to Buddhism
RELG 254 Zen Buddhism
RELG 280 The Politics of Sex in Asian Religion (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 282 Samurai: Ethics of Death and Loyalty (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 365 Mysticism (not offered in 2022‐23)

Capstone Course: To be determined in consultation with the director.

Economics
Economics analyzes the ways in which resources can be most effectively organized to meet the
changing goals of a society. Courses in the department combine theoretical and applied economics
as a basis for developing and evaluating alternative public policies for entire economies and for the
institutions and organizations within an economy. Department courses give a broad and practical
perspective for those considering careers in law, government, business, education, journalism or
social service; they also meet the needs of students seeking graduate work in economics, business
administration, and public affairs. The basic introductory courses, 110 or 111 or both, are
prerequisites to advanced courses; they offer a good foundation for further work in economics, but
they have also been designed for students who have not yet selected majors and for those in other
majors seeking an introduction to the analysis of economic theory and policies. Note: Either course
in the principles sequence, Economics 110 or 111, can be taken first. Independent study (291 or
391) for those with special research interests can be taken with any faculty member.
Requirements for the Economics Major
All economics majors are required to successfully complete 75 credits from:






ECON 110
ECON 111
MATH 111 (or equivalent)
STAT 120 (formerly MATH 215) or STAT 250 (formerly MATH 275) or equivalent
Three core courses

o
o
o



ECON 329
ECON 330
ECON 331
Advanced Seminar, ECON 395

138




ECON 400
24 additional credits in Economics courses numbered 215 or above (this includes 6 credits in ECON
398)
Six Talk Credits: As part of the satisfaction of their comps exercise, majors must accumulate six talk
credits during their combined junior and senior years by attending department events, including:
the Veblen‐Clark Lecture, the Lamson Lecture, other scheduled talks by visiting speakers sponsored
by the department, and candidate job talks during recruiting years. These talk credits will be
tracked by the economics department and will not appear on your transcript. Note: Attending the
Veblen‐Clark Lecture or the Lamson Lecture each count for two talk credits. All others count for one
talk credit. Juniors may accumulate one talk credit for attending the senior comps poster session.
We encourage majors to participate in the numerous activities that take place in the department.

Mathematics 111 (or equivalent) and Statistics 120 (formerly Mathematics 215) or Statistics 250
(formerly Mathematics 275) or equivalent, are prerequisites for Economics 329 and 331, and
Mathematics 111 (or equivalent) is a prerequisite for Economics 330. We strongly encourage
prospective majors to complete all mathematics prerequisites no later than the sophomore year.
Math courses may be taken on an elective S/Cr/NC basis but we encourage students to take these on
a graded basis. Completion of the core sequence is a prerequisite for Advanced Seminars and the
integrative exercise and must occur by the end of the junior year. We encourage students to take
Economics 329 in their sophomore spring or junior fall terms. All Advanced Seminars (395) are
typically offered only in fall term.
Any student intending graduate work in economics should also take Mathematics 120, 210 or 211,
232, 236, 241 and Statistics 250 (formerly Mathematics 275). Courses teaching additional skills
such as computer science, advanced rhetoric and analysis of political and social policies are highly
recommended.
Economics Courses
ECON 110 Principles of Macroeconomics This course gives students a foundation in the general principles of
economics as a basis for effective citizenship and, when combined with 111, as a preparation for all
advanced study in economics. Topics include analysis of the measurement, level, and distribution of
national income; the concepts of inflation and depression; the role and structure of the banking system;
fiscal and monetary stabilization techniques; implications of and limits to economic growth; and
international economic relations. 6 credits; SI, QRE; Fall, Winter, Spring; Yingtong Xie, Michael T Hemesath,
Victor Almeida, Ethan L Struby
ECON 111 Principles of Microeconomics This course gives the students a foundation in the general
principles of economics as a basis for effective citizenship and, when combined with 110, as a preparation
for all advanced study in economics. Topics include consumer choice theory; the formation of prices under
competition, monopoly, and other market structures; the determination of wages, profits, and income from
capital; the distribution of income; and an analysis of policy directed towards problems of public finance,
pollution, natural resources, and public goods. 6 credits; SI, QRE; Fall, Winter, Spring; Aaron M Swoboda,
Nathan D Grawe, Jonathan M Lafky, Faress F Bhuiyan
ECON 201 Analysis of Microeconomic Development Models This course is the second part of a two‐term
winter break course sequence beginning with Economics 240. This course will focus on critically analyzing
the appropriateness of modern microeconomic development models in the context of Bangladesh.
Students exposed to various on‐site visits and lectures in Bangladesh during the winter break will be
required to research, write, and present their views on the reliability of different model assumptions and

139
implications they studied in Economics 240. Prerequisite: Economics 111 and 240. 6 credits; SI, QRE, WR2,
IS; Not offered 2022‐23
ECON 205 Race & Inequality: Public Policies to Address Historical Discrimination The economic divide
between white and Black Americans is persistent and well‐documented. How to effectively address this
divide continues to be a source of active public debate. In the recent book From Here to Equality, Duke
economist William Darity and folklorist A. Kirsten Mullen examine the possibility of reparations for Black
Americans as a way to bridge this divide. This book examines the history of reparations policies, and it
raises all sorts of important questions regarding the policy justification for reparations, and practical details
regarding how such a policy could actually be implemented. Kirkus Reviews has said about this book that it
is “essential to any debate over the need for and way to achieve meaningful large‐scale reparations.” In
this course, we read and discuss From Here to Equality, to obtain deeper insights into reparations as a
policy toward economic equality for Black Americans. The course will include a conversation with Professor
Darity, who is delivering the Veblen‐Clark Lecture in spring 2022. There will also be an assigned final paper
that provides students the opportunity to summarize and evaluate the arguments for reparations. Students
will be expected to participate in discussions including taking turns leading discussions, and this will form
part of the basis on which their participation will be evaluated. 2 credits; SI; Not offered 2022‐23
ECON 221 Cambridge Program: Contemporary British Economy The course focuses on the development of
the British economy since the inter‐war period. The approach integrates economic and historical analysis to
discuss the development of the structure of the British economy, economic policy, and the institutions
affecting economic performance. Students majoring in economics, political science, and history are
particularly encouraged to apply, but the seminar is open to students of all majors. Prerequisite: Students
who have completed Economics 110 and 111 by the end of spring term 2022 are eligible to participate in
the seminar. 6 credits; SI, QRE, IS; Summer; Michael T Hemesath
ECON 222 Cambridge Program: The Industrial Revolution in Britain Economic growth only became an
expected part of modern life during the Industrial Revolution. This course will explore the origins and
implications of the Industrial Revolution in Britain. Why did this revolution start in Britain? How did it
change life for British citizens, and how did the many changes move beyond Britain? The course will use
readings, lectures and visits to industrial sites and museums in and around Manchester. Students majoring
in economics, political science, and history are particularly encouraged to apply, but the seminar is open to
students of all majors. Prerequisite: Students who have completed Economics 110 and 111 by the end of
spring term 2022 are eligible to participate in the seminar. 6 credits; SI, WR2, QRE, IS; Summer; Michael T
Hemesath
ECON 223 Cambridge Program: The Economics of Multinational Enterprises Among the most important
economic institutions in the world today are multinational enterprises. This course will explore the theory
and practice of MNEs. Lectures and reading will be supplemented with visits to British multinationals.
Students majoring in economics, political science, and history are particularly encouraged to apply, but the
seminar is open to students of all majors. Prerequisite: Students who have completed Economics 110 and
111 by the end of spring term 2022 are eligible to participate in the seminar. 3 credits; NE, QRE, IS;
Summer; Michael T Hemesath
ECON 224 Cambridge Program: J.M. Keynes and the Bloomsbury Group Britain has nurtured some of the
most important economists in the world and Cambridge was the intellectual home of the foremost of
these, J.M. Keynes. This course will explore the economic theory and social thought of Keynes and the
influence of his contemporaries in the Bloomsbury group on post‐WWI Britain. Students majoring in
economics, political science, and history are particularly encouraged to apply, but the seminar is open to

140
students of all majors. Prerequisite: Students who have completed Economics 110 and 111 by the end of
spring term 2022 are eligible to participate in the seminar. 3 credits; S/CR/NC; SI, QRE, IS; Summer; Michael
T Hemesath
ECON 230 Politics & Pub Policy in Washington DC Program: Policy Analysis in Washington, DC Students will
participate in a seminar centered around meetings with experts in areas of global and domestic politics and
policy. Over the course of the term they will collaborate in groups to produce a presentation exploring the
economic dimensions of public policy with a focus on identifying the costs and benefits to the various
stakeholder groups and the methods economists use to measure those impacts. Prerequisite: Economics
110 or 111 and Statistics 120 (formerly Mathematics 215) or instructor consent. 6 credits; SI, QRE; Not
offered 2022‐23
ECON 233 World Economic History This course surveys world economic history from Paleolithic times to
today. It helps students understand the fundamental forces that drive economic growth and living
standards. We address questions such as: How did economic systems function during the ancient and
medieval periods? What caused the Industrial Revolution, allowing billions of humans to escape the
“Malthusian trap”? Why haven’t all countries experienced economic growth? Finally, what lessons can we
learn from the past to help us better understand what the future may hold? The course focuses on long‐
term trends, but we will also examine short‐run cyclical phenomena such as financial crises. Prerequisite:
Economics 110 and 111. 6 credits; SI, WR2, IS, QRE; Not offered 2022‐23
ECON 240 Microeconomics of Development This course explores household behavior in developing
countries. We will cover areas including fertility decisions, health and mortality, investment in education,
the intra‐household allocation of resources, household structure, and the marriage market. We will also
look at the characteristics of land, labor, and credit markets, particularly technology adoption; land tenure
and tenancy arrangements; the role of agrarian institutions in the development process; and the impacts of
alternative politics and strategies in developing countries. The course complements Economics 241.
Prerequisite: Economics 111. 6 credits; SI, QRE, IS; Winter; Faress F Bhuiyan
ECON 241 Growth and Development Why are some countries rich and others poor? What causes countries
to grow? This course develops a general framework of economic growth and development to analyze these
questions. We will document the empirical differences in growth and development across countries and
study some of the theories developed to explain these differences. This course complements Economics
240. Prerequisite: Economics 110. 6 credits; SI, QRE, IS; Spring; Ethan L Struby
ECON 242 Economy of Latin America This course offers an introduction to the economy of Latin America.
We will study the region's policies undertaken during its colonial period and its development strategy
during the twentieth century. Topics include import substitution industrialization, the 1980s debt crisis,
hyperinflation, dollarization, and international trade agreements. Besides these experiences shared by
many countries in Latin America, we will also analyze selected country‐specific ones such as the Brazilian
stabilization plans and the recent Argentine sovereign debt crisis. Prerequisite: Economics 110. 6 credits; SI,
IS; Not offered 2022‐23
ECON 257 Economics of Gender This course uses economic theory and empirical evidence to examine
gender differentials in education, marriage, fertility, earnings, labor market participation, occupational
choice, and household work. Trends and patterns in gender‐based outcomes will be examined across time,
across countries, and within socio‐economic groups, using empirical evidence from both historical and
recent research. The impact of government and firm policies on gender outcomes will also be examined. By
the end of the course, students will be able to utilize the most common economic tools in the study of

141
gender inequality, as well as understand their strengths and weaknesses. Prerequisite: Economics 111. 6
credits; SI, QRE; Fall; Prathi Seneviratne
ECON 262 The Economics of Sports In recent years, the sports business in the United States has grown into
a multibillion‐dollar industry. Understanding the sports business from an economic viewpoint is the subject
of this course. Topics will include player compensation, revenue‐sharing, salary caps, free agency,
tournaments, salary discrimination, professional franchise valuation, league competitiveness, college
athletics, and the economics of sports stadiums and arenas. Prerequisite: Economics 110 and 111. 6 credits;
SI, QRE; Spring; Mark T Kanazawa
ECON 263 Entrepreneurship, Innovation, and Economic Performance Joseph Schumpeter, in lamenting the
absence of an accepted theory of entrepreneurship, observed that this gap in economics is much like
having Hamlet performed with the Prince of Denmark absent. Much has changed since Schumpeter leveled
this criticism. Economics has embraced the contributions of entrepreneurs and provided theoretical models
explaining their actions. This course explores the foundations of a microeconomic theory of
entrepreneurship, investigating the role of entrepreneurs (and intrapreneurs within large organizations) as
agents for change. Case studies of business development provide practical illustrations of ways in which
entrepreneurs operate and how their efforts contribute to economic progress. Prerequisite: Economics 110
or 111. 6 credits; SI; Not offered 2022‐23
ECON 264 Health Care Economics This course will focus on the economics of medical care and how health
care markets and systems work. We will consider both private health insurance markets and publicly
provided social health insurance. The changes which demography, technology and the Affordable Health
Care Act are bringing to health care delivery will be examined. Some time will be devoted to understanding
the health care systems in other countries. This is a discussion course. Prerequisite: Economics 111. 6
credits; SI, QRE; Fall; Nathan D Grawe
ECON 265 Game Theory and Economic Applications Game theory is the study of purposeful behavior in
strategic situations. It serves as a framework for analysis that can be applied to everyday decisions, such as
working with a study group and cleaning your room, as well as to a variety of economic issues, including
contract negotiations and firms' output decisions. In this class, modern game theoretic tools will be
primarily applied to economic situations, but we will also draw on examples from other realms.
Prerequisite: Economics 111. 6 credits; SI, QRE; Spring; Jonathan M Lafky
ECON 267 Behavioral Economics This course introduces experimental economics and behavioral economics
as two complementary approaches to understanding economic decision making. We will study the use of
controlled experiments to test and critique economic theories, as well as how these theories can be
improved by introducing psychologically plausible assumptions to our models. We will read a broad survey
of experimental and behavioral results, including risk and time preferences, prospect theory, other‐
regarding preferences, the design of laboratory and field experiments, and biases in decision making.
Prerequisite: Economics 110 and 111. 6 credits; SI, QRE; Winter; Jonathan M Lafky
ECON 268 Economics of Cost Benefit Analysis Cost‐benefit analysis is a tool commonly used by economists
and policy makers to compare and choose among competing policy options. This course will cover the basic
theory and empirical techniques necessary to quantify and aggregate the impacts of government policy,
especially as related to the environment. Topics covered include the time value of money; uncertainty;
sensitivity analysis; option value; contingent valuation; hedonic estimation; basic research design.
Throughout the course case studies will be used to elucidate and bring life to the theoretical concepts.

142
Prerequisite: Economics 111. Some statistics background will be useful. 6 credits; SI, QRE; Not offered 2022‐
23
ECON 270 Economics of the Public Sector This course provides a theoretical and empirical examination of
the government's role in the U.S. economy. Emphasis is placed on policy analysis using the criteria of
efficiency and equity. Topics include rationales for government intervention; analysis of alternative public
expenditure programs from a partial and/or general equilibrium framework; the incidence of various types
of taxes; models of collective choice; cost‐benefit analysis; intergovernmental fiscal relations. Prerequisite:
Economics 110 and 111. 6 credits; SI, QRE, WR2; Winter; Jenny Bourne
ECON 271 Economics of Natural Resources and the Environment This course focuses on environmental
economics, energy economics, and the relationship between them. Economic incentives for pollution
abatement, the industrial organization of energy production, optimal depletion rates of energy sources, and
the environmental and economic consequences of alternate energy sources are analyzed. Prerequisite:
Economics 111. 6 credits; SI, QRE; Winter; Mark T Kanazawa
ECON 274 Labor Economics Why do some people choose to work and others do not? Why are some people
paid higher wages than others? What are the economic benefits of education for the individual and for
society? How do government policies, such as subsidized child care, the Earned Income Tax Credit and the
income tax influence whether people work and the number of hours they choose to work? These are some
of the questions examined in labor economics. This course will focus on the labor supply and human capital
decisions of individuals and households. Prerequisite: Economics 110 and 111. 6 credits; SI, QRE; Not
offered 2022‐23
ECON 275 Law and Economics Legal rules and institutions influence people's behavior. By setting
acceptable levels of pollution, structuring guidelines for contract negotiations, deciding who should pay for
the costs of an accident, and determining punishment for crimes, courts and legislatures create incentives.
How do economic considerations factor into legal rules, and how do laws affect economic output and
distribution? In this class, we use court cases, experiments, and current legal controversies to explore such
issues. Prerequisite: Economics 111. 6 credits; SI, QRE, WR2; Fall; Jenny Bourne
ECON 276 Money and Banking This course examines the role of money and monetary institutions in
determination of income, employment, and prices in the domestic and world economies. It also examines
the role of commercial banking and financial markets in a market‐based economy. Prerequisite: Economics
110 and 111. 6 credits; SI, QRE; Not offered 2022‐23
ECON 277 History and Theory of Financial Crises This course provides a historical perspective on financial
crises and highlights their main empirical patterns. This course also introduces economic theories of
financial crises, in which leverage, moral hazard, mistaken beliefs, and coordination problems play a central
role. We will also discuss some policy instruments used to balance risk exposure, such as deposit insurance,
collective action clauses, exchange controls, and foreign reserves. Prerequisite: Economics 110 and 111. 6
credits; SI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
ECON 278 Industrial Organization and Firm Behavior This course analyzes the firm's marketing and pricing
problems, its conduct, and the resulting economic performance, given the nature of the demand for its
products, its buying markets, the nature of its unit costs, and the structure of its selling markets.
Prerequisite: Economics 111. 6 credits; SI, QRE; Not offered 2022‐23
ECON 279 Technological Change and the Labor Market This course studies dynamics in domestic labor
markets in the context of technological advancements. Topics are centered around the impact of different

143
types of technological change, implications on productivity, and job polarization. To gauge the economy’s
structural transformation due to adoption of new technologies, we explore rising levels of employment and
income inequality, both from a theoretical and empirical perspective. These core subjects are accompanied
by discussions on related phenomena, which shaped modern labor markets, such as immigration and
institutional changes in form of unionization and minimum wages. Prerequisite: Economics 110 and
Economics 111. 6 credits; SI, QRE; Not offered 2022‐23
ECON 280 International Trade A study of international trade theories and their policy implications. Classical
and neo‐classical trade models, the gains from trade, the terms of trade and the distribution of income,
world trade patterns, international factor movements, tariffs, and the impact of commercial policy on
developing and developed countries are analyzed. Prerequisite: Economics 111. 6 credits; SI, QRE; Spring;
Prathi Seneviratne
ECON 281 International Finance This course studies theories of the multi‐faceted interaction between the
balance of international payments and foreign exchange market and the general levels of domestic prices,
employment and economic activity. Topics include the balance of payments, foreign exchange markets,
adjustment mechanisms in international payments, macroeconomic policies for internal and external
balance, and international monetary systems. Prerequisite: Economics 110. 6 credits; SI, QRE; Spring; Victor
Almeida
ECON 282 The Theory of Investment Finance This course provides an introduction to the main financial
instruments that are used to fund economic activity. We will explore how investment products function and
learn how to price a few of them. Attention will be given to the choices investors make, and should make,
when allocating portfolios. Topics include bond pricing, stock pricing, option pricing, the mortgage market,
hedge funds, private equity, optimal portfolios, defaults, financial intermediary capital, and investors'
behavioral biases. Prerequisite: Economics 110 and 111. 6 credits; SI, QRE; Fall; Yingtong Xie
ECON 283 Corporate Organization and Finance This course investigates decision‐making by firms and their
managers. Specific topics include tradeoffs in corporate organization, executive compensation, project
valuation, the cost of capital under debt and equity financing, and the firm’s optimal capital
structure. Prerequisite: Economics 110 and 111. 6 credits; SI, QRE; Spring; Yingtong Xie
ECON 293 Race and Inequality This course examines the empirical economics literature surrounding racial
inequalities. Readings will be selected by students to reflect the dimensions of inequality of greatest
interest but may include: employment, earnings, wealth, education, criminal justice, and family choices.
Students will draw on these works in addition to theories of economic justice to develop proposals for just
policy reform. Prerequisite: Economics 110 & 111 and Economics 293 Theories of Economic Justice. 2
credits; SI, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
ECON 329 Econometrics This course is an introduction to the statistical methods used by economists to test
hypotheses and to study and quantify economic relationships. The course emphasizes both econometric
theory and practical application through analysis of economic data sets using statistical software. Prior
experience with R is strongly encouraged. Topics include two‐variable and multiple regression, interval
estimation and hypothesis testing, discrete and continuous structural change, parameter restrictions,
model construction, experimental design, issues of functional specification, model overfitting and
underfitting, heteroscedasticity, autocorrelation, and multicollinearity. Prerequisite: Economics 110 and
111, Mathematics 111 and either Statistics 120 (formerly Mathematics 215) or Statistics 250 (formerly
Mathematics 275) or instructor consent. 6 credits; SI, QRE; Fall, Spring; Mark T Kanazawa

144
ECON 330 Intermediate Price Theory An analysis of the forces determining relative prices within the
framework of production and distribution. This class is normally taken by juniors. Sophomores considering
enrolling should speak to the instructor. Prerequisite: Economics 110 and 111 and Mathematics 111. 6
credits; SI, QRE; Fall, Winter; Jenny Bourne
ECON 331 Intermediate Macro Theory Analysis of the forces determining the general level of output,
employment, and prices with special emphasis on the role of money and on interest rate determination.
This class is normally taken by juniors. Sophomores considering enrolling should speak to the instructor.
Prerequisite: Economics 110 and 111, Mathematics 111 and Statistics 120 (formerly Mathematics 215) or
Statistics 250 (formerly Mathematics 275) or instructor consent. 6 credits; SI, QRE; Winter, Spring; Ethan L
Struby
ECON 395 Advanced Topics in Economics of Inequality This seminar focuses on empirical analysis of topics
in the economics of inequality. Specific areas of study depend on student interest and may include: labor
markets; earnings gaps across gender, race, sexual orientation, disability, and immigrant status; labor‐
market discrimination; gender inequality in different countries and regions; immigration and the role of
cultural transmission; and family decision‐making. Class time is primarily devoted to discussion of peer‐
reviewed journal articles, theory and application of advanced econometric techniques, and student‐led
presentations. Prerequisite: Economics 329, 330 and 331 or instructor permission. 6 credits; SI, WR2, QRE,
IS; Fall; Prathi Seneviratne
ECON 395 Advanced Topics in Housing Economics This course focuses on the empirical analysis of housing
prices, quantities, supply, demand, and related policy. Specific areas of study include: market trends in
housing prices over time and space, hedonic analysis of local amenities like schools, parks, or pollution,
differential effects of housing policy, segregation, migration, and many others depending on student
interests. Class time is a mix of journal article discussion, empirical lab exercises, and other individual and
small group activities aimed at helping students write an independent research prospectus. Throughout,
we'll pay special attention to issues of research integrity, the open science movement, and causal inference
research methods. Prerequisite: Economics 329, 330, and 331, or instructor permission. 6 credits; SI, WR2,
QRE; Fall; Aaron M Swoboda
ECON 395 Advanced Topics in Macroeconomics and Finance The seminar will explore contemporary
approaches to the analysis of the macroeconomy and financial markets. Topics include tests of canonical,
micro‐founded models of household, investor, and firm behavior; the analysis of business cycles and the
dynamic response of the macroeconomy to exogenous shocks; proximate and fundamental theories of
long‐run growth across countries; and the design and effects of stabilization policies. Students will also be
exposed to empirical methods suited for the causal analysis of cross‐sectional, time series, and panel data.
Prerequisite: Economics 329, 330 and 331 or instructor permission. 6 credits; SI, WR2; Fall; Victor Almeida
ECON 398 Advanced Research in Economics This course is designed to support majors in developing
advanced skills in economic research and communication. Through a combination of class discussion, small
group work, and/or one‐on‐one interactions with the professor, majors learn the process of constructing
strong, theoretically‐grounded arguments through primary research, secondary research, or both. Students
will also learn and practice strategies for engaging critically with contemporary scholarship and effective
techniques of peer review and the oral presentation of research. Prerequisite: Concurrent registration in
Economics 400.; Economics 395 Instructor permission required. 6 credits; S/CR/NC; NE; Fall, Winter, Spring;
Ethan L Struby, Aaron M Swoboda, Faress F Bhuiyan, Prathi Seneviratne, Victor Almeida

145
ECON 400 Integrative Exercise 3 credits; S/NC; Fall, Winter, Spring; Ethan L Struby, Aaron M Swoboda,
Victor Almeida, Prathi Seneviratne

Educational Studies
Guided by the assumption that an understanding of educational values, policies, and practices is a
legitimate and important part of liberal arts studies, Carleton offers a program of courses which,
with the exception of student teaching, are open to all students. No major is offered; however, we
do offer an interdisciplinary minor for those students who are especially interested in educational
studies but not necessarily in public school teaching.
Students may also qualify for 5-12 teaching licensure in the State of Minnesota in communication
arts, mathematics, earth and space science, life science, and social studies. 7-12 licensure is offered
in chemistry and physics. K-12 licensure is offered in world languages (French, German, Spanish)
and visual arts. Earning licensure requires: completion of an approved Carleton major; other subject
area courses not required by the Carleton major and/or specific courses within the major; a specified
program of educational studies courses (see the Teacher Education Handbook); and student
teaching in the major field, usually in a "13th Term."
Students interested in pursuing teaching licensure should obtain a handbook from the department
office and should consult with a member of the education faculty early in their sophomore year.
Students are encouraged to make formal application for admission to the teacher education program
during the spring term of their sophomore year. Carleton licensure students will complete the
majority of their course work at Carleton, but there will be courses only offered at St. Olaf through
the inter-registration process which are required for licensure. St. Olaf will submit Carleton
student's recommendation for licensure to the Minnesota Department of Education after completion
of student teaching.
Educational Studies Minor
The Educational Studies Minor provides an interdisciplinary approach to the study of education as
an individual pursuit, an institutional venture, and a societal imperative. The minor aims to develop
thoughtful, skillful and imaginative students of the psychology, social and cultural history, and
politics of education. Students will pursue the study of education as a liberal art, one that both
reveals the constraints of socialization and informs alternative visions of self and community. The
minor is appropriate for students of all majors interested in the stewardship of education as a
cornerstone of democracy.
Requirements for the Educational Studies Minor
All students will be required to take a minimum of seven courses: three core courses, three
supporting courses and a senior seminar. Students interested in the minor are advised to begin their
study during their sophomore year.
Core Courses:



EDUC 110 Introduction to Educational Studies
EDUC 234 Educational Psychology

146


EDUC 338 Multicultural Education

Supporting Courses: Select one course from each of the three clusters; these courses must be from
three different departments. The list below is not an exhaustive one. Please check the appropriate
department pages for course descriptions and prerequisites and when courses are offered. We can
neither control nor predict when courses from other departments are offered. If you have difficulty
enrolling in a course for a particular cluster, please see the minor adviser to discuss other courses
that might fulfill the requirement.
Cluster I Learning, Cognition and Development The purpose of this cluster is to provide
additional perspective about how K-12 students develop physically, cognitively and socially. This
cluster builds on the core course, Educational Psychology.















CCST 100 Growing up Cross‐Culturally
CGSC 130 Revolutions in Mind: An Introduction to Cognitive Science
CGSC 130 What Minds Are What They Do: An Introduction to Cognitive Science
CGSC 232 Cognitive Processes
CGSC 236 Thinking, Reasoning, and Decision Making
CGSC 386 Adolescent Cognitive Development: Developing an Identity and Life Plans (not offered in
2022‐23)
EDUC 262 Culturally Sustaining Pedagogy: Teaching and Learning in Diverse Classrooms (not offered
in 2022‐23)
EDUC 344 Teenage Wasteland: Adolescence and the American High School (not offered in 2022‐23)
PSYC 210 Psychology of Learning and Memory
PSYC 232 Cognitive Processes
PSYC 250 Developmental Psychology (not offered in 2022‐23)
PSYC 251 Lifespan Development
PSYC 258 Social Cognition (not offered in 2022‐23)
PSYC 366 Cognitive Neuroscience (not offered in 2022‐23)

Cluster II Social and Cultural Context of Schooling in a Diverse Society The purpose of this
cluster is to provide an in-depth understanding of the broader historical, social and cultural context
in which U.S. educational institutions are located. This cluster builds on the background knowledge
provided by the core courses Introduction to Educational Studies and Multicultural Education.














AMST 115 Introduction to American Studies
EDUC 262 Culturally Sustaining Pedagogy: Teaching and Learning in Diverse Classrooms (not offered
in 2022‐23)
EDUC 340 Race, Immigration, and Schools
EDUC 367 Culture Wars in the Classroom (not offered in 2022‐23)
GWSS 110 Introduction to Gender, Women's & Sexuality Studies
HIST 116 Intro to Indigenous Histories, 1887‐present (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 122 U.S. Women's History to 1877 (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 123 U.S. Women's History Since 1877 (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 125 African American History I: From Africa to the Civil War
HIST 126 African American History II
HIST 203 American Indian Education (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 228 Civil Rights and Black Power
HIST 229 Working with Gender in U.S. History

147











IDSC 203 Talking about Diversity (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 275 Black Radical Political Thought, 1919‐1969 (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 302 Subordinated Politics and Intergroup Relations*
PSYC 384 Psychology of Prejudice
RELG 140 Religion and American Culture (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 249 Religion and American Public Life (not offered in 2022‐23)
SOAN 114 Modern Families: An Introduction to the Sociology of the Family (not offered in 2022‐23)
SOAN 226 Anthropology of Gender (not offered in 2022‐23)
SOAN 272 Sociological Perspectives on Race and Ethnicity in the United States (not offered in 2022‐
23)
SOAN 288 Diversity, Democracy, Inequality in America (not offered in 2022‐23)

Cluster III Public Policy and Educational Reform The purpose of this cluster is to explore the
public policy contexts, issues and questions that are most relevant to educational policy making and
school reform. This cluster builds on the background knowledge provided by the core course
Introduction to Educational Studies.











AFST 112 Black Revolution on Campus (not offered in 2022‐23)
ECON 270 Economics of the Public Sector
EDUC 225 Issues in Urban Education
EDUC 245 The History of American School Reform (not offered in 2022‐23)
EDUC 250 Fixing Schools: Politics and Policy in American Education (not offered in 2022‐23)
EDUC 330 Refugee and Immigrant Experiences in Faribault, MN (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 122 Politics in America: Liberty and Equality
POSC 218 Schools, Scholarship and Policy in the United States (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 273 Race and Politics in the U.S.
SOAN 170 Investigating (In)Equality: Comparative Welfare States (not offered in 2022‐23)

Senior Seminar:


EDUC 395 Senior Seminar

Educational Studies Courses
EDUC 110 Introduction to Educational Studies This course will focus on education as a multidisciplinary field
of study. We will explore the meanings of education within individual lives and institutional contexts, learn
to critically examine the assumptions that writers, psychologists, sociologists and philosophers bring to the
study of education, and read texts from a variety of disciplines. What has "education" meant in the past?
What does "education" mean in contemporary American society? What might "education" mean to people
with differing circumstances and perspectives? And what should "education" mean in the future? Open
only to first‐and second‐year students. 6 credits; SI, WR2, IDS; Fall, Winter, Spring; Jeff A Snyder, Anita P
Chikkatur
EDUC 225 Issues in Urban Education This course is an introduction to urban education in the United States.
Course readings and discussion will focus on various perspectives in the field in order to understand the key
issues and debates confronting urban schools. We will examine historical, political, economic, and socio‐
cultural frameworks for understanding urban schools, students and teachers. Through course readings,
field visits and class discussions, we explore the following: (1) student, teacher and researcher perspectives
on urban education, (2) the broader sociopolitical urban context of K‐12 schooling in cities, (3) teaching and

148
learning in urban settings and (4) ideas about re‐imagining urban education. 6 credits; SI, IDS; Spring; Anita
P Chikkatur
EDUC 234 Educational Psychology Human development and learning theories are studied in relation to the
teaching‐learning process and the sociocultural contexts of schools. Three hours outside of class per week
are devoted to observing learning activities in public school elementary and secondary classrooms and
working with students. 6 credits; SI; Fall; Deborah Appleman
EDUC 245 The History of American School Reform This course explores major issues in the history of school
reform in the United States, with an emphasis on the twentieth century. Readings and discussions examine
the role of education in American society, the various and often competing goals of school reformers, and
the dynamics of educational change. With particular focus on the American high school, this course looks at
why so much reform has produced so little change. 6 credits; SI, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
EDUC 250 Fixing Schools: Politics and Policy in American Education How can we fix American public
schools? What is "broken" about our schools? How should they be repaired? And who should lead the fix?
This course will examine the two leading contemporary educational reform movements: accountability and
school choice. With an emphasis on the nature of the teaching profession and the work of foundations, this
course will analyze the policy agendas of different reform groups, exploring the dynamic interactions
among the many different stakeholders responsible for shaping American education. 6 credits; SI, IDS; Not
offered 2022‐23
EDUC 262 Culturally Sustaining Pedagogy: Teaching and Learning in Diverse Classrooms This course focuses
on the importance of integrating students' cultural backgrounds in all aspects of learning. We will study
various theoretical perspectives on culturally relevant, responsive, and sustaining pedagogy and will
explore several school sites that incorporate that perspective into their approach to teaching and learning.
Students will design and teach culturally sustaining curriculum from their own disciplinary background in K‐
16 setting. Prerequisite: Educational Studies 100 or 110. 6 credits; SI, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
EDUC 330 Refugee and Immigrant Experiences in Faribault, MN This course will examine the intersection of
immigration and education at all levels in rural communities in the U.S. with a site‐specific focus on
Faribault, MN. Through readings, primary document analyses, discussions, written assignments, and virtual
dialogues with community collaborators, students will understand the challenges and opportunities in
Faribault for people with refugee and immigrant backgrounds and for educators and community members
working with those communities to create supportive contexts (including educational, social, economic,
political) that meet the needs and aspirations of those communities. Prerequisite: 100 or 200 level
Educational Studies course or instructor consent. 6 credits; SI, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
EDUC 338 Multicultural Education This course focuses on the respect for human diversity, especially as
these relate to various racial, cultural and economic groups, and to women. It includes lectures and
discussions intended to aid students in relating to a wide variety of persons, cultures, and life styles.
Prerequisite: 100 or 200‐level Educational Studies course or instructor permission. 6 credits; SI, IDS; Spring;
Anita P Chikkatur
EDUC 340 Race, Immigration, and Schools This course explores the important role that public schools have
played in the American national imagination as the way to socialize students about what it means to be
American and to prepare them to participate as citizens in a democracy. Focusing on two periods of high
rates of immigration into the United States (1890‐1920 and 1965‐present), the course examines how public
schools have attempted to Americanize newly arrived immigrant children as well as to socialize racial
minority children into the American mainstream. While most of the readings will focus on urban schools,

149
the course will also consider the growing immigrant populations in rural schools through readings and
applied academic civic engagement projects. Prerequisite: 100 or 200‐level Educational Studies course or
instructor permission. 6 credits; SI, IDS; Fall; Anita P Chikkatur
EDUC 344 Teenage Wasteland: Adolescence and the American High School Is adolescence real or invented?
How does the American high school affect the nature of American adolescence? How does adolescence
affect the characteristics of middle and high schools? In addition to treating the concept historically, this
interdisciplinary course focuses on psychological, sociological, and literary views of adolescence in and out
of the classroom. We will also analyze how adolescence is represented in popular culture, including
television, film, and music. Prerequisite: 100 or 200‐level Educational Studies course. 6 credits; SI; Not
offered 2022‐23
EDUC 367 Culture Wars in the Classroom This course examines past and present school controversies,
including school prayer, banned books, and student protests. Who controls the curriculum? How do we
teach contentious issues such as evolution, racism, and climate change? To what extent do teachers and
students enjoy the right to free expression? These are the kinds of questions “Culture Wars in the
Classroom” will explore, as we consider the purpose of public education in a diverse, multicultural nation.
Prerequisite: 100 or 200‐level Educational Studies course or instructor consent. 6 credits; NE, IDS; Not
offered 2022‐23
EDUC 385 Schooling and Communities: A Practicum for Teacher Candidates This course permits licensure
candidates to become more familiar with their student teaching sites through frequent observation and
interaction. The course provides an opportunity to work directly in schools and community organizations
related to schools and to reflect on that experience in a classroom setting. Prerequisite: Acceptance into
Teacher Licensure Program and registration for fall student teaching. 6 credits; NE; Spring; Deborah
Appleman
EDUC 395 Senior Seminar This is a capstone seminar for educational studies minors. It focuses on a
contemporary issue in American education with a different topic each year. Recent seminars have focused
on the school to prison pipeline, youth activism, intellectual freedom in schools, and gender and sexuality in
education. Senior seminars often incorporate off campus work with public school students and teachers.
Prerequisite: Educational Studies minor or instructor permission. 6 credits; NE; Spring; Jeff A Snyder

English
General Information
In Carleton’s English department, we are passionate about the study of literature and the teaching of
writing. We offer a major in English as well as a minor in creative writing. The diverse backgrounds
and specialties of English department faculty are reflected in the variety of our literature courses
and creative writing workshops. Our courses examine a range of genres, historical eras, literary and
cultural traditions, and critical approaches.
The skills in reading, interpretation, writing, creativity, and communication taught in the English
department are essential to all fields of study, whether artistic, humanistic, or scientific. These skills
also transfer readily to a broad range of careers.

150

Requirements for the English Major
Seventy-two credits in English, including the following:
1. Foundations: One designated 100-level course that develops skills of literary analysis and
introduces the concept of genre


















ENGL 100 Drama, Film, and Society
ENGL 100 Imagining a Self
ENGL 100 Novel, Nation, Self
ENGL 100 Rhetoric: Art of Persuasion
ENGL 100 Reading, Interpreting, Writing
ENGL 112 Introduction to the Novel
ENGL 113 Horror Fiction (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 114 Introduction to Medieval Narrative
ENGL 115 The Art of Storytelling
ENGL 116 The Art of Drama: Passion, Politics, and Culture (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 117 African American Literature (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 118 Introduction to Poetry
ENGL 119 Introduction to U.S. Latino/a Literature (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 120 American Short Stories (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 137 Terrorism and the Novel
ENGL 144 Shakespeare I
ENGL 187 Murder

2. Historical Eras: 36 credits in literature courses numbered 200-394 (excluding 220 and 295)
which must include:


Group I: 12 credits in literature before 1660
o ENGL 202 The Bible as Literature (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 203 Other Worlds of Medieval English Literature (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 207 Princes. Poets. Power (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 208 The Faerie Queene (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 209 The Merchant of Venice: A Project Course
o ENGL 210 From Chaucer to Milton: Early English Literature (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 213 Christopher Marlowe (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 214 Revenge Tragedy
o ENGL 216 Milton
o ENGL 219 Global Shakespeare
o ENGL 244 Shakespeare I
o ENGL 281 London Program: London as City: Londinium to the Anthropocene
o ENGL 310 Shakespeare II (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 381 London as a City: Londinium to the Anthropocene



Group II: 12 credits in literature between 1660 and 1900
o AMST 230 The American Sublime: Landscape, Character & National Destiny in Nineteenth
Century America (not offered in 2022‐23)
o AMST 256 Walt Whitman's New York (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 212 Nineteenth‐Century American Literature (not offered in 2022‐23)

151
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o


ENGL 217 A Novel Education (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 218 The Gothic Spirit
ENGL 221 "Moby‐Dick" & Race: Whiteness and the Whale (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 222 The Art of Jane Austen
ENGL 223 American Transcendentalism (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 225 'Public Offenders': Pre‐Raphaelites and Bloomsbury Group (not offered in 2022‐
23)
ENGL 239 Democracy: Politics, Race, & Sex in Nineteenth Century American Novels (not
offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 319 The Rise of the Novel
ENGL 323 Romanticism and Reform
ENGL 327 Victorian Novel (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 328 Victorian Poetry (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 338 Dickinson, Moore, Bishop

Group III: 12 credits in literature after 1900
o AMST 240 The Midwest and the American Imagination (not offered in 2022‐23)
o AMST 269 Woodstock Nation (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 215 Modern American Literature (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 227 Imagining the Borderlands
o ENGL 230 Studies in African American Literature: From the 1950s to the Present
o ENGL 233 Writing and Social Justice (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 234 Literature of the American South (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 235 Asian American Literature
o ENGL 236 American Nature Writing (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 238 African Literature in English (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 241 Latinx Voices in the Age of Trump
o ENGL 247 The American West (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 248 Visions of California (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 249 Modern Irish Literature: Poetry, Prose, and Politics
o ENGL 250 Indian Fiction 1880‐1980 (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 251 Contemporary Indian Fiction (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 252 Caribbean Fiction (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 256 Ireland Program: Irish History and Culture (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 258 Playwrights of Color: Taking the Stage
o ENGL 274 Ireland Program: Modern Irish Literature in Ireland (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 288 California Program: The Literature of California
o ENGL 329 The City in American Literature
o ENGL 332 Faulkner, Hemingway, and Fitzgerald (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 350 The Postcolonial Novel: Forms and Contexts
o ENGL 352 Toni Morrison: Novelist (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 359 World Literature in the Twenty‐First Century (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 362 Narrative Theory
o ENGL 366 The Carleton Miscellany (not offered in 2022‐23)
o THEA 242 Modern American Drama (not offered in 2022‐23)

3. English 295: Critical Methods
4. English 395: Advanced Seminar

152



ENGL 395 Seductive Fictions
ENGL 395 The Twenty‐First Century Novel

5. English 400: Senior Integrative Exercise (A senior may choose one of the following):


Colloquium Option: A group option in which participants discuss, analyze and write about a
thematically coherent list of literary works.



Research Essay Option: An extended essay on a topic of the student's own devising. Open only to
students who have completed their Advanced Seminar by the end of fall term senior year.



Creative Writing Option: Creation of a work of literary art. Open only to students who have
completed at least two creative writing courses (one of which must be at the 300 level) by the end
of fall term senior year.



Project Option: Creation of an individual or group multidisciplinary project.

Of the 72 credits required to complete the major:
1. at least 6 credits must be taken in each of the following traditions:


T1: Literature of Ireland and Britain
o ENGL 112 Introduction to the Novel
o ENGL 114 Introduction to Medieval Narrative
o ENGL 116 The Art of Drama: Passion, Politics, and Culture (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 135 Imperial Adventures (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 144 Shakespeare I
o ENGL 202 The Bible as Literature (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 203 Other Worlds of Medieval English Literature (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 207 Princes. Poets. Power (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 208 The Faerie Queene (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 209 The Merchant of Venice: A Project Course
o ENGL 210 From Chaucer to Milton: Early English Literature (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 213 Christopher Marlowe (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 214 Revenge Tragedy
o ENGL 216 Milton
o ENGL 217 A Novel Education (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 218 The Gothic Spirit
o ENGL 219 Global Shakespeare
o ENGL 222 The Art of Jane Austen
o ENGL 225 'Public Offenders': Pre‐Raphaelites and Bloomsbury Group (not offered in 2022‐
23)
o ENGL 244 Shakespeare I
o ENGL 249 Modern Irish Literature: Poetry, Prose, and Politics
o ENGL 256 Ireland Program: Irish History and Culture (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 274 Ireland Program: Modern Irish Literature in Ireland (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 281 London Program: London as City: Londinium to the Anthropocene
o ENGL 282 London Program: London Theater
o ENGL 310 Shakespeare II (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 319 The Rise of the Novel

153
o
o
o
o
o

ENGL 323 Romanticism and Reform
ENGL 327 Victorian Novel (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 328 Victorian Poetry (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 381 London as a City: Londinium to the Anthropocene
ENGL 395 Seductive Fictions



T2: Literature of North America
o AMST 230 The American Sublime: Landscape, Character & National Destiny in Nineteenth
Century America (not offered in 2022‐23)
o AMST 256 Walt Whitman's New York (not offered in 2022‐23)
o AMST 269 Woodstock Nation (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 113 Horror Fiction (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 117 African American Literature (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 120 American Short Stories (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 212 Nineteenth‐Century American Literature (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 215 Modern American Literature (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 221 "Moby‐Dick" & Race: Whiteness and the Whale (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 223 American Transcendentalism (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 227 Imagining the Borderlands
o ENGL 230 Studies in African American Literature: From the 1950s to the Present
o ENGL 233 Writing and Social Justice (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 234 Literature of the American South (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 235 Asian American Literature
o ENGL 236 American Nature Writing (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 239 Democracy: Politics, Race, & Sex in Nineteenth Century American Novels (not
offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 241 Latinx Voices in the Age of Trump
o ENGL 247 The American West (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 248 Visions of California (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 258 Playwrights of Color: Taking the Stage
o ENGL 288 California Program: The Literature of California
o ENGL 329 The City in American Literature
o ENGL 332 Faulkner, Hemingway, and Fitzgerald (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 338 Dickinson, Moore, Bishop
o ENGL 352 Toni Morrison: Novelist (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 366 The Carleton Miscellany (not offered in 2022‐23)



T3: Global Anglophone Literatures
o ENGL 238 African Literature in English (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 250 Indian Fiction 1880‐1980 (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 251 Contemporary Indian Fiction (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 252 Caribbean Fiction (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 350 The Postcolonial Novel: Forms and Contexts
o ENGL 359 World Literature in the Twenty‐First Century (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 395 The Twenty‐First Century Novel

2. at least 24 credits must be in courses numbered 300-395
3. up to 6 credits may be in literature other than English in the original or translation

154











































ARBC 144 Arabic Literature at War (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARBC 185 The Creation of Classical Arabic Literature (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARBC 315 Readings in Premodern Arabic Anthologies
CHIN 245 Chinese Vision of the Past in Translation (not offered in 2022‐23)
CHIN 251 Heroes, Heroines, Exceptional Lives in Chinese Biographical Histories (not offered in 2022‐
23)
CHIN 355 Contemporary Chinese Short Stories
CHIN 364 Chinese Classic Tales and Modern Adaptation (not offered in 2022‐23)
CLAS 112 The Epic in Classical Antiquity: Texts, Contexts, and Intertexts (not offered in 2022‐23)
CLAS 116 Ancient Drama: Truth in Performance (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 202 The Bible as Literature (not offered in 2022‐23)
FREN 238 Back to the Future: French Classics Reimagined (not offered in 2022‐23)
FREN 239 Banned Books
FREN 241 The Lyric and Other Seductions (not offered in 2022‐23)
FREN 244 Contemporary France and Humor (not offered in 2022‐23)
FREN 245 Francophone Literature of Africa and the Caribbean
FREN 248 Murder and Mayhem: Narratives of Suspense (not offered in 2022‐23)
FREN 259 Paris Program: Hybrid Paris
FREN 340 Arts of Brevity: Short Fiction
FREN 341 Madame Bovary and Her Avatars
FREN 347 Gender and Sexuality in the Francophone World
FREN 359 Paris Program: Hybrid Paris
FREN 360 The Algerian War of Liberation and Its Representations (not offered in 2022‐23)
FREN 395 The Mande of West Africa (not offered in 2022‐23)
GERM 247 Mirror, Mirror: Reflecting on Fairy Tales and Folklore (not offered in 2022‐23)
GRK 204 Intermediate Greek Prose and Poetry
GRK 240 Xenophon's Oeconomicus
JAPN 345 Advanced Reading in Modern Japanese Literature: The Short Story
LATN 204 Intermediate Latin Prose and Poetry
RELG 161 The Jewish Bible (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 162 Jesus, the Bible, and Christian Beginnings (not offered in 2022‐23)
RUSS 244 The Rise of the Russian Novel (not offered in 2022‐23)
RUSS 261 Lolita (not offered in 2022‐23)
RUSS 266 Dostoevsky (not offered in 2022‐23)
RUSS 267 War and Peace (not offered in 2022‐23)
RUSS 341 From Folktale to Fanfiction: Russian Short Prose (not offered in 2022‐23)
RUSS 351 Chekhov (not offered in 2022‐23)
SPAN 242 Introduction to Latin American Literature
SPAN 262 Myth and History in Central American Literature (not offered in 2022‐23)
SPAN 277 The Poem as Artifact: Art and Work in Contemporary Spanish American Poetry (not
offered in 2022‐23)
SPAN 330 The Invention of the Modern Novel: Cervantes' Don Quijote
SPAN 366 Jorge Luis Borges: Less a Man Than a Vast and Complex Literature
SPAN 371 Yours Truly: The Body of the Letter (not offered in 2022‐23)

4. up to 12 credits may be in creative writing
Double-majors considering completing the integrative exercise during the junior year will need
written approval from the departmental chair.

155

Workshops in Writing
The Department of English offers workshop courses in the writing of fiction, poetry, and creative
non-fiction. Students are encouraged to submit their work to college publications such as The
Second Laird Miscellany, the Clap, and The Manuscript.
Writers on the Carleton faculty include poets Gregory Hewett and Susan Jaret McKinstry and
novelist Gregory Blake Smith. The department invites writers (most recently Jane Hamilton, Kao
Kalia Yang, and Aisha Sabatini Sloan) to teach workshops in creative writing. In addition, the
department brings writers to campus for readings and lectures. Recent visitors have included Teju
Cole, Edwidge Danticat, David Henry Hwang, and Sarah Vap.
English Creative Writing Minor
The English Creative Writing Minor is intended for students who wish to gain experience in
creative writing by taking a series of writing workshops accompanied by the study of literature
relevant to their writing interests. Students must complete 36 total credits as described below.


18 credits of creative writing workshops, chosen from college‐wide offerings in prose fiction,
poetry, playwriting, screenwriting, television writing, and/or creative nonfiction; including at least
one course in the English Department and one course at the 300 level:
o CAMS 271 Fiction
o CAMS 278 Writing for Television (not offered in 2022‐23)
o CAMS 279 Screenwriting
o CCST 270 Creative Travel Writing Workshop
o ENGL 160 Creative Writing
o ENGL 233 Writing and Social Justice (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 265 News Stories
o ENGL 270 Short Story Workshop
o ENGL 271 Poetry Workshop
o ENGL 370 Advanced Fiction Workshop
o ENGL 371 Advanced Poetry Workshop
o THEA 246 Playwriting (not offered in 2022‐23)



18 credits of literature courses drawn from offerings in the Department of English, in courses
numbered over 100. Must include at least one course at the 300 level.

English majors who wish to also minor in Creative Writing may do so, but they may not count more
than 18 credits of their major toward the 36 total credits for the minor.

English Courses
ENGL 100 Drama, Film, and Society With an emphasis on critical reading, writing, and the fundamentals of
college‐level research, this course will develop students' knowledge, understanding, and appreciation of the
relationship between drama and film and the social and cultural contexts of which they are (or were) a part
and product. The course explores the various ways in which these plays and movies (which might include

156
anything and everything from Spike Lee to Tony Kushner to Christopher Marlowe) generate meaning, with
particular attention to the social, historical, and political realities that contribute to that meaning. An
important component of this course will be attending live performances in the Twin Cities. These required
events may be during the week and/or the weekend. 6 credits; AI, WR1; Fall; Pierre Hecker
ENGL 100 Imagining a Self This course examines how first‐person narrators present, define, defend, and
construct the self. We will read an assortment of autobiographical and fictional works, focusing on the
critical issues that the first‐person speaker "I" raises. In particular, we will consider the risks and rewards of
narrative self‐exposure, the relationship between autobiography and the novel, and the apparent intimacy
between first‐person narrators and their readers. Authors will include James Boswell, Charlotte Bronte,
Harriet Jacobs, Sylvia Plath, and Dave Eggers. 6 credits; AI, WR1; Fall; Jessica L Leiman
ENGL 100 Novel, Nation, Self With an emphasis on critical reading and writing in an academic context, this
course will examine how contemporary writers from a range of global locations approach the question of
the writing of the self and of the nation. Reading novels from both familiar and unfamiliar cultural contexts
we will examine closely our practices of reading, and the cultural expectations and assumptions that
underlie them. 6 credits; AI, WR1; Fall; Arnab Chakladar
ENGL 100 Reading, Interpreting, Writing The texts we will read and the themes to be discussed include: the
quest for home and belonging in Angelou's All God's Children Need Traveling Shoes; transitions in Obama's
Dreams from My Father; difficult and essential conversations in Ta‐Nehisi Coates's Between the World and
Me; trauma and healing in Gyasi's Transcendent Kingdom. Our related focus on expository writing will be
complemented by a final writing assignment that offers you the option to craft either a Letter to Your
Younger Self on transitions, or an Autobiographical Fragment in which you trace your search for belonging.
6 credits; AI, WR1; Fall; Kofi Owusu
ENGL 100 Rhetoric: Art of Persuasion Rhetoric's all around us: in political manifestos and legal pleadings; in
professions of love and advertisements for dog food. We use it whenever we urge someone to believe what
we say or do what we want. But how well do we understand the foundations and protocols of this art that
teaches us "to see the available means of persuasion?" In this class we'll study the origins and theory of
rhetoric (via Aristotle), examine exemplary instances (from Pericles to Trump), and consider the charges
(via Plato) that it's all lies and trickery, while learning how to compose persuasive academic papers and
presentations. 6 credits; AI, WR1; Fall; Timothy Raylor
ENGL 109 The Craft of Academic Writing This course is designed to demystify the practice of academic
writing and to introduce students to the skills they’ll need to write effectively in a variety of academic
disciplines and contexts. Students will learn how to respond to other authors’ claims, frame clear
arguments of their own, structure essays to develop a clear logical flow, integrate outside sources into their
writing, and improve their writing through revision. All sections will include a variety of readings, multiple
writing assignments, and substantial feedback from the course instructor. 6 credits; NE, WR2; Winter,
Spring; Nancy J Cho, George G Shuffelton
ENGL 112 Introduction to the Novel This course explores the history and form of the British novel, tracing
its development from a strange, sensational experiment in the eighteenth century to a dominant literary
genre today. Among the questions that we will consider: What is a novel? What makes it such a popular
form of entertainment? How does the novel participate in ongoing conversations about family, sex, class,
race, and nation? How did a genre once considered a source of moral corruption become a legitimate
literary form? Authors include: Daniel Defoe, Jane Austen, Charlotte Bronte, Bram Stoker, Virginia Woolf,
and Jackie Kay. 6 credits; LA, WR2; Winter; Jessica L Leiman

157
ENGL 113 Horror Fiction Horror is a speculative genre of literature with ancient roots in storytelling.
Contemporary horror finds source material in centuries‐old religious narratives, medieval folklore, historical
events, contemporary urban legends, and real‐life crimes and violence. Horror has always been full of
metaphors for society’s deepest fears and anxieties; studying and writing horror can yield limitless insight
and inspiration for imagining different futures. How do writers use atmosphere, characterization, symbols,
allusions, suspense, etc. to hold our attention and produce “horror” toward some larger thematic end? In
this course, students will read, analyze, discuss, and write about various literary fictional texts that could
fall under the rubric of “horror” and practice creative writing in this capacious and rebellious genre. Authors
may include Lesley Arimah, Neil Gaiman, Shirley Jackson, Han Kang, and Victor LaValle. 6 credits; LA, WR2,
IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
ENGL 114 Introduction to Medieval Narrative This class will focus on three of the most popular and closely
connected modes of narrative enjoyed by medieval audiences: the epic, the romance, and the saint's life.
Readings, drawn primarily from the English and French traditions, will include Beowulf, The Song of Roland,
the Arthurian romances of Chretien de Troyes, and legends of St. Alexis and St. Margaret. We will consider
how each narrative mode influenced the other, as we encounter warriors and lovers who suffer like saints,
and saints who triumph like warriors and lovers. Readings will be in translation or highly accessible
modernizations. 6 credits; LA, WR2; Winter; George G Shuffelton
ENGL 115 The Art of Storytelling Jorge Luis Borges is quoted as saying that "unlike the novel, a short story
may be, for all purposes, essential." This course focuses attention primarily on the short story as an
enduring form. We will read short stories drawn from different literary traditions and from various parts of
the world. Stories to be read include those by Aksenov, Atwood, Beckett, Borges, Camus, Cheever, Cisneros,
Farah, Fuentes, Gordimer, Ishiguro, Kundera, Mahfouz, Marquez, Moravia, Nabokov, Narayan, Pritchett,
Rushdie, Trevor, Welty, and Xue. 6 credits; LA, WR2; Spring; Kofi Owusu
ENGL 116 The Art of Drama: Passion, Politics, and Culture An exploration of drama approached as
literature and in performance. New digital resources enable us to take world‐class productions from the
National Theatre and elsewhere as our texts. Drawing examples both globally and across time, we will
consider plays and recent productions in their historical and cultural contexts. Students will develop critical
vocabularies, debate interpretations, and hone their interpretive and rhetorical skills in writing reviews and
essays. 6 credits; LA, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
ENGL 117 African American Literature This course pays particular attention to the tradition of African
American literary expression and the individual talent that brings depth and diversity to that tradition. The
course's broader aims will be complemented by an introduction to the concept of genre and by the
cultivation of the relevant skills of literary analysis. Authors to be read include Baraka, Ed Bullins, Countee
Cullen, Douglass, Ellison, Nikki Giovanni, Hughes, Weldon Johnson, Larsen, and Wheatley. 6 credits; LA,
WR2, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
ENGL 118 Introduction to Poetry “Poetry is the way we help give name to the nameless so it can be
thought”—Audre Lorde. In this course we will explore how poets use form, tone, sound, imagery, rhythm,
and subject matter to create works of astonishing imagination, beauty, and power. In discussions, Moodle
posts, and essay assignments we’ll analyze individual works by poets from Sappho to Amanda Gorman (and
beyond); there will also be daily recitations of poems, since the musicality is so intrinsic to the meaning. 6
credits; LA, WR2; Fall, Winter, Spring; Constance Walker, Timothy Raylor
ENGL 119 Introduction to U.S. Latino/a Literature We will begin by examining the forefathers and mothers
of Latino/a literature: the nineteenth century texts of exile, struggles for Latin American independence, and

158
southwestern resistance and accommodation. The early twentieth century offers new genres: immigrant
novels and popular poetry that reveal the nascent Latino identities rooted in (or formed in opposition to)
U.S. ethics and ideals. Finally we will read a sampling of the many excellent contemporary authors who are
transforming the face of American literature. 6 credits; LA, WR2, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
ENGL 120 American Short Stories An exploration of the remarkable variety and evolution of the American
short story from its emergence in the early nineteenth century to the present. Authors read will range from
Washington Irving to Octavia Butler and Jhumpa Lahiri. We will examine how formal aspects such as
narration, dialogue, style and character all help shape this genre over time. While our central focus will be
on literary artistry, we will also consider examples of pulp fiction, graphic short stories, flash fiction and
some cinematic adaptations of stories. 6 credits; LA, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
ENGL 135 Imperial Adventures Indiana Jones has a pedigree. In this class we will encounter some of his
ancestors in stories, novels and comic books from the early decades of the twentieth century. The wilds of
Afghanistan, the African forest, a prehistoric world in Patagonia, the opium dens of mysterious exotic
London‐‐these will be but some of our stops as we examine the structure and ideology and lasting legacy of
the imperial adventure tale. Authors we will read include Arthur Conan Doyle, Edgar Rice Burroughs,
Rudyard Kipling and H. Rider Haggard. 6 credits; LA, WR2, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
ENGL 137 Terrorism and the Novel Novels share some key attributes with acts of terrorism. Both focus our
attention on questions of plot, responsibility, and effect. Both often ask us to question how a person's
character or background influences unanticipated subsequent events. Like terrorists, many novelists hope
their work will draw attention to forgotten causes and influence public opinion through a combination of
shock and sympathy. This course will explore a few of the many novels dedicated to terrorism, whether
from the perspective of perpetrators, victims, or authorities. The reading list will include examples from
Britain, America, and South Asia. 6 credits; LA, WR2; Fall; George G Shuffelton
ENGL 144 Shakespeare I A chronological survey of the whole of Shakespeare's career, covering all genres
and periods, this course explores the nature of Shakespeare's genius and the scope of his art. Particular
attention is paid to the relationship between literature and stagecraft ("page to stage"). By tackling the
complexities of prosody, of textual transmission, and of Shakespeare's highly figurative and metaphorical
language, the course will help you further develop your ability to think critically about literature. Note:
Declared or prospective English majors should register for English 244. 6 credits; LA; Fall; Pierre Hecker
ENGL 160 Creative Writing You will work in several genres and forms, among them: traditional and
experimental poetry, prose fiction, and creative nonfiction. In your writing you will explore the relationship
between the self, the imagination, the word, and the world. In this practitioner’s guide to the creative
writing process, we will examine writings from past and current authors, and your writings will be critiqued
in a workshop setting and revised throughout the term. 6 credits; ARP, WR2; Fall, Winter, Spring; Gregory
G Hewett, Christopher M Martin, Susan Jaret McKinstry
ENGL 187 Murder From the ancient Greeks to the Bible to the modern serial killer novel, murder has always
been a preeminent topic of intellectual and artistic investigation. Covering a range of genres, including
fiction, nonfiction, drama, and film, this transhistorical survey will explore why homicide has been the
subject of such fierce attention from so many great minds. Works may include: the Bible, Shakespeare, De
Quincey, Poe, Thompson, Capote, Tey, McGinniss, Auster, French, Malcolm, Wilder, and Morris, as well as
critical, legal, and other materials. Warning: not for the faint‐hearted. (May not be retaken as ENGL 395.) 6
credits; LA, WR2; Winter; Pierre Hecker

159
ENGL 202 The Bible as Literature We will approach the Bible not as an archaeological relic, nor as the Word
of God, but "as a work of great literary force and authority [that has] shaped the minds and lives of
intelligent men and women for two millennia and more." As one place to investigate such shaping, we will
sample how the Bible (especially in the "Authorized" or King James version) has drawn British and American
poets and prose writers to borrow and deploy its language and respond creatively to its narratives, images,
and visions. 6 credits; LA, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
ENGL 203 Other Worlds of Medieval English Literature When medieval writers imagined worlds beyond
their own, what did they see? This course will examine depictions of the afterlife, the East, and magical
realms of the imagination. We will read romances, saints' lives, and a masterpiece of pseudo‐travel
literature that influenced both Shakespeare and Columbus, alongside contemporary theories of
postcolonialism, gender and race. We will visit the lands of the dead and the undead, and compare
gruesome punishments and heavenly rewards. We will encounter dog‐headed men, Amazons, cannibals,
armies devoured by hippopotami, and roasted geese that fly onto waiting dinner tables. Be prepared.
Readings in Middle English and in modern translations. 6 credits; LA, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
ENGL 207 Princes. Poets. Power Can you serve power without sacrificing your principles or risking your
life? We examine the classic explorations of the problem‐‐Machiavelli's Prince, Castiglione's Courtier, and
More's Utopia‐‐and investigate the place of poets and poetry at court of Henry VIII, tracing the birth of the
English sonnet, and the role of poetry in the rise and fall of Anne Boleyn. 3 credits; LA; Not offered 2022‐23
ENGL 208 The Faerie Queene Spenser's romance epic: an Arthurian quest‐cycle, celebrating the Virgin
Queen, Elizabeth I, and England's imperial destiny. Readers encounter knights, ladies, and lady‐knights;
enchanted groves and magic castles; dragons and sorcerers; and are put through a series of moral tests and
hermeneutic challenges. 3 credits; LA; Not offered 2022‐23
ENGL 209 The Merchant of Venice: A Project Course This interdisciplinary course will explore one of
Shakespeare’s most controversial and complex plays, The Merchant of Venice. We will investigate the play’s
historical, political, religious, and theatrical contexts as we try to understand not only the world that
produced the play, but the world that came out of it. How should what we learn of the past inform a
modern production? How can performance offer interpretive arguments about the play’s meanings?
Individual and group projects may involve research, writing, dramaturgy, program design, and exhibition
curation. Students will be actively involved in a full‐scale Carleton Players production of the play. 6 credits;
LA, IS; Spring; Pierre Hecker, Andrew I Carlson
ENGL 210 From Chaucer to Milton: Early English Literature An introduction to some of the major genres,
texts, and authors of medieval and Renaissance England. Readings may include works of Chaucer, Spenser,
Shakespeare, Milton, and the lyric poets of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. 6 credits; LA, WR2;
Not offered 2022‐23
ENGL 212 Nineteenth‐Century American Literature A survey of the major forms and voices of nineteenth‐
century American literature during the Romantic and Realist periods, with attention to historical and
intellectual contexts including ideas about race, class, gender, and the nature of democracy. Topics covered
will include the literary writings of Transcendentalism, abolition, and the rise of literary "realism" after the
Civil War as an artistic response to urbanization and industrialism. Writers to be read include Irving,
Hawthorne, Melville, Emerson, Fuller, Jacobs, Douglass, Dickinson, Whitman, Twain, James, and Chopin. 6
credits; LA, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23

160
ENGL 213 Christopher Marlowe Christopher Marlowe lived fast, died young, and left behind a beautiful
body of work. The course will explore the major plays and poems, as well as the life, of this transgressive
Elizabethan writer. 3 credits; LA, WR2, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
ENGL 214 Revenge Tragedy Madness, murder, conspiracy, poison, incest, rape, ghosts, and lots of blood:
the fashion for revenge tragedy in Elizabethan and Jacobean England led to the creation of some of the
most brilliant, violent, funny, and deeply strange plays in the history of the language. Authors may include
Cary, Chapman, Ford, Marston, Middleton, Kyd, Tourneur, and Webster. 3 credits; LA, WR2, IS; Winter;
Pierre Hecker
ENGL 215 Modern American Literature A survey of some of the central movements and texts in American
literature, from World War I to the present. Topics covered will include modernism, the Harlem
Renaissance, the Beat generation and postmodernism. 6 credits; LA, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
ENGL 216 Milton Radical, heretic, and revolutionary, John Milton wrote the most influential, and perhaps
the greatest, poem in the English language. We will read the major poems (Lycidas, the sonnets, Paradise
Lost, Samson Agonistes), a selection of the prose, and will attend to Milton's historical context, to the
critical arguments over his work, and to his impact on literature and the other arts. 6 credits; LA, WR2; Fall;
Timothy Raylor
ENGL 217 A Novel Education Samuel Johnson declared novels to be “written chiefly to the young, the
ignorant, and the idle, to whom they serve as lectures of conduct, and introductions into life.” This course
explores what sort of education the novel offered its readers during a time when fiction was considered a
source of valuable lessons and also an agent of corruption. We will read a selection of eighteenth‐ and
nineteenth‐century children’s literature, seduction fiction, and novels of manners, considering how these
works engage with early educational theories, notions of male and female conduct, and concerns about the
didactic and sensational possibilities of fiction. Authors include Samuel Richardson, Jane Austen, Maria
Edgeworth, and Charles Dickens. 6 credits; LA, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
ENGL 218 The Gothic Spirit The eighteenth and early nineteenth century saw the rise of the Gothic, a genre
populated by brooding hero‐villains, vulnerable virgins, mad monks, ghosts, and monsters. In this course,
we will examine the conventions and concerns of the Gothic, addressing its preoccupation with terror,
transgression, sex, otherness, and the supernatural. As we situate this genre within its literary and historical
context, we will consider its relationship to realism and Romanticism, and we will explore how it reflects
the political and cultural anxieties of its age. Authors include Horace Walpole, Ann Radcliffe, Matthew
Lewis, Jane Austen, Mary Shelley, and Emily Bronte. 6 credits; LA, WR2; Fall; Jessica L Leiman
ENGL 219 Global Shakespeare Shakespeare’s plays have been reimagined and repurposed all over the
world, performed on seven continents, and translated into over 100 languages. The course explores how
issues of globalization, nationalism, translation (both cultural and linguistic), and (de)colonization inform
our understanding of these wonderfully varied adaptations and appropriations. We will examine the social,
political, and aesthetic implications of a range of international stage, film, and literary versions as we
consider how other cultures respond to the hegemonic original. No prior experience with Shakespeare is
necessary. 3 credits; LA, WR2, IS; Winter; Pierre Hecker
ENGL 220 Arts of Oral Presentation Instruction and practice in being a speaker and an audience in formal
and informal settings. 3 credits; S/CR/NC; NE; Spring; Timothy Raylor
ENGL 221 "Moby‐Dick" & Race: Whiteness and the Whale From its famous opening line to its apocalyptic
close, Melville’s lofty and profane romance of the whaling‐industry is gripped by the myths and marked by

161
the traumas of race. Exploring its black‐and‐white thematics and racialized characters in nineteenth‐ as well
as twenty‐first‐century social and political contexts, this course takes Melville’s stupendous book as an
anatomy of "whiteness" as a racial construct in U.S. cultural history. 6 credits; LA, WR2, IDS; Not offered
2022‐23
ENGL 222 The Art of Jane Austen All of Jane Austen's fiction will be read; the works she did not complete or
choose to publish during her lifetime will be studied in an attempt to understand the art of her mature
comic masterpieces, Sense and Sensibility, Pride and Prejudice, Mansfield Park, Emma, and Persuasion. 6
credits; LA, WR2; Winter; Constance Walker
ENGL 223 American Transcendentalism Attempts to discern the nineteenth‐century Zeitgeist come down,
Emerson says, to a "practical question of the conduct of life. How shall I live?" This interdisciplinary course
will investigate the works of the American Transcendentalist movement in its restless discontent with the
conventional, its eclectic search for better ways of thinking and living. We will engage major works of
Emerson, Thoreau, Fuller, and Whitman alongside documents of the scientific, religious, and political
changes that shaped their era and provoked their responses. 6 credits; LA, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
ENGL 225 'Public Offenders': Pre‐Raphaelites and Bloomsbury Group Two exceptional groups of artists
changed aesthetic and cultural history through their writings, art, politics, and lives. The Pre‐Raphaelite
Brotherhood began in 1847 when art students united to create “direct and serious and heartfelt” work; the
Bloomsbury group began with Cambridge friends sharing their insistence on aesthetic lives. Critics said the
PRB “extolled fleshliness as the supreme end of poetic and pictorial art,” and the Bloomsbury Group
“painted in circles, lived in squares and loved in triangles.” We will study Dante Rossetti, Holman Hunt, John
Millais, William Morris, Virginia Woolf, E.M. Forster, Roger Fry, Vanessa and Clive Bell. 6 credits; LA, WR2,
IS; Not offered 2022‐23
ENGL 227 Imagining the Borderlands This course engages the borderlands as space (the geographic area
that straddles nations) and idea (liminal spaces, identities, communities). We examine texts from writers
like Anzaldúa, Butler, Cervantes, Dick, Eugenides, Haraway, and Muñoz first to understand how borders act
to constrain our imagi(nation) and then to explore how and to what degree the borderlands offer hybrid
identities, queer affects, and speculative world‐building. We will engage the excess of the borderlands
through a broad chronological and generic range of U.S. literary and visual texts. Come prepared to
question what is "American", what is race, what is human. 6 credits; WR2, IDS, LA; Winter; Adriana Estill
ENGL 230 Studies in African American Literature: From the 1950s to the Present We will explore
developments in African American literature since the 1950s with a focus on literary expression in the Civil
Rights Era; on the Black Arts Movement; on the new wave of feminist/womanist writing; and on the
experimental and futuristic fictions of the twenty‐first century. Authors to be read include Ralph Ellison,
James Baldwin, Lorraine Hansberry, Malcolm X, Audre Lorde, Amiri Baraka, Ishmael Reed, Alice Walker,
August Wilson, Charles Johnson, Ntozake Shange, Gloria Naylor, Suzan‐Lori Parks, Kevin Young, and Tracy
Smith. 6 credits; LA, IDS; Winter; Kofi Owusu
ENGL 233 Writing and Social Justice Social justice is fairness as it manifests in society, but who gets to
determine what fairness looks, sounds, feels like? The self‐described Black Canadian poet Dionne Brand
says that she doesn’t write toward justice because that doesn’t exist, but that she writes against tyranny. If
we use that framework, how does that change our own writing and our own notions of justice in our or any
time? What is the role of literary writing, especially fiction, the essay, and poetry in the collective and
individual quest to understand and build conditions that could yield increased potential for social justice? In
this course, students will read, analyze, discuss, and write about various texts that might be considered to

162
be against myriad tyrannies, if not necessarily toward social justice. Authors may include Octavia Butler,
Phillip Metres, Toni Morrison, Myung Mi Kim, and M. NourbeSe Philipe. 6 credits; ARP, WR2, IDS; Not
offered 2022‐23
ENGL 234 Literature of the American South Masterpieces of the "Southern Renaissance" of the early and
mid‐twentieth century, in the context of American regionalism and particularly the culture of the South, the
legacy of slavery and race relations, social and gender roles, and the modernist movement in literature.
Authors will include Allen Tate, Jean Toomer, William Faulkner, Robert Penn Warren, Zora Neale Hurston,
Eudora Welty, Katherine Anne Porter, William Percy, and others. 6 credits; LA, WR2, IDS; Not offered 2022‐
23
ENGL 235 Asian American Literature This course is an introduction to major works and authors of fiction,
drama, and poetry from about 1900 to the present. We will trace the development of Asian American
literary traditions while exploring the rich diversity of recent voices in the field. Authors to be read include
Carlos Bulosan, Sui Sin Far, Philip Kan Gotanda, Maxine Hong Kingston, Jhumpa Lahiri, Milton Murayama,
Chang‐rae Lee, Li‐young Lee, and John Okada. 6 credits; LA, WR2, IDS; Fall; Nancy J Cho
ENGL 236 American Nature Writing A study of the environmental imagination in American literature. We
will explore the relationship between literature and the natural sciences and examine questions of style,
narrative, and representation in the light of larger social, ethical, and political concerns about the
environment. Authors read will include Thoreau, Muir, Jeffers, Abbey, and Leopold. Students will write a
creative Natural History essay as part of the course requirements. 6 credits; LA, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
ENGL 238 African Literature in English This is a course on texts drawn from English‐speaking Africa since the
1950's. Authors to be read include Chinua Achebe, Ama Ata Aidoo, Ayi Kwei Armah, Buchi Emecheta, Bessie
Head, Benjamin Kwakye, and Wole Soyinka. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
ENGL 239 Democracy: Politics, Race, & Sex in Nineteenth Century American Novels An important
preoccupation of nineteenth century America was the nature of democracy and the proper balance of
individualism and the social good. An experiment in government, democracy also raised new questions
about gender, class, and race. Citizenship was contested; roles in the new, expanding nation were fluid;
abolition and emancipation, the movement for women's rights, industrialization all caused ferment and
anxiety. The course will explore the way these issues were imagined in fiction by such writers as Cooper,
Hawthorne, Maria Sedgwick, Stowe, Tourgee, Henry Adams, Twain, Gilman, and Chesnutt. 6 credits; LA,
WR2, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
ENGL 241 Latinx Voices in the Age of Trump The last few years have placed Latinx communities under siege
and in the spotlight. The demands of the census and new policies around immigration mean that
who counts as Latinx and why it matters has public visibility and meaning. Simultaneously, the last few
years have seen an incredible growth of new literary voices and genres in the world of Latinx letters. From
fictional and creative nonfiction accounts of detention camps, border crossings, and asylum court
proceedings to lyrical wanderings in bilingualism to demands for greater attention to Afrolatinidad and the
particular experiences of Black Latinxs‐‐Latinx voices are rising. We will engage with current literary
discussions in print, on twitter, and in literary journals as we chart the shifting, developing terrain of Latinx
literatures. 6 credits; LA, WR2, IDS; Fall; Adriana Estill
ENGL 244 Shakespeare I A chronological survey of the whole of Shakespeare's career, covering all genres
and periods, this course explores the nature of Shakespeare's genius and the scope of his art. Particular
attention is paid to the relationship between literature and stagecraft ("page to stage"). By tackling the
complexities of prosody, of textual transmission, and of Shakespeare's highly figurative and metaphorical

163
language, the course will help you further develop your ability to think critically about literature. Note: non‐
majors should register for English 144. 6 credits; LA, WR2; Fall; Pierre Hecker
ENGL 245 Bollywood Nation This course will serve as an introduction to Bollywood or popular Hindi cinema
from India. We will trace the history of this cinema and analyze its formal components. We will watch and
discuss some of the most celebrated and popular films of the last 60 years with particular emphasis on
urban thrillers and social dramas. 6 credits; LA, WR2, IS; Spring; Arnab Chakladar
ENGL 247 The American West Wallace Stegner once described the West as "the geography of hope" in the
American imagination. Despite various dystopian urban pressures, the region still conjures up images of
wide vistas and sunburned optimism. We will explore this paradox by examining both popular mythic
conceptions of the West (primarily in film) and more searching literary treatments of the same area. We
will explore how writers such as Twain, Cather, Stegner and Cormac McCarthy have dealt with the
geographical diversity and multi‐ethnic history of the West. Weekly film showings will include The
Searchers, McCabe and Mrs. Miller, Unforgiven, and Lone Star. Extra Time Required, evening screenings. 6
credits; LA, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
ENGL 248 Visions of California An interdisciplinary exploration of the ways in which California has been
imagined in literature, art, film and popular culture from pre‐contact to the present. We will explore the
state both as a place (or rather, a mosaic of places) and as a continuing metaphor‐‐whether of promise or
disintegration‐‐for the rest of the country. Authors read will include Muir, Steinbeck, Chandler, West, and
Didion. Weekly film showings will include Sunset Boulevard, Chinatown and Blade Runner. 6 credits; LA,
WR2, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
ENGL 249 Modern Irish Literature: Poetry, Prose, and Politics What can and should be the role of literature
in times of bitter political conflict? Caught in partisan strife, Irish writers have grappled personally and
painfully with the question. We will read works by Joyce, Yeats, and Heaney, among others, and watch films
(Bloody Sunday, Hunger) that confront the deep and ongoing divisions in Irish political life. 6 credits; LA,
WR2; Winter; Constance Walker
ENGL 250 Indian Fiction 1880‐1980 In this course we will follow the various paths that the novel in India has
taken since the late nineteenth century. Reading both works composed in English and some in translation
we will probe in particular the ways in which questions of language and national/cultural identity are
constructed and critiqued in the Indian novel. We will read some of the most celebrated Indian writers of
the last 100 odd years as well as some who are not as well‐known as they should be. The course will also
introduce you to some fundamental concepts in postcolonial studies. 6 credits; LA, WR2, IS; Not offered
2022‐23
ENGL 251 Contemporary Indian Fiction Contemporary Indian writers, based either in India or abroad, have
become significant figures in the global literary landscape. This can be traced to the publication of Salman
Rushdie's second novel, Midnight's Children in 1981. We will begin with that novel and read some of the
other notable works of fiction of the following decades. The class will provide both a thorough grounding in
the contemporary Indian literary scene as well as an introduction to some concepts in post‐colonial studies.
6 credits; LA, WR2, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
ENGL 252 Caribbean Fiction This course will examine Anglophone fiction in the Caribbean from the late
colonial period through our contemporary moment. We will examine major developments in form and
language as well as the writing of identity, personal and (trans)national. We will read works by canonical
writers such as V.S Naipaul, George Lamming and Jamaica Kincaid, as well as by lesser known contemporary
writers. 6 credits; LA, WR2, IS; Not offered 2022‐23

164
ENGL 253 Food Writing: History, Culture, Practice We are living in perhaps the height of what might be
called the "foodie era" in the U.S. The cooking and presentation of food dominates Instagram and is one of
the key draws of YouTube and various television and streaming networks; shows about chefs and food
culture are likewise very popular. Yet a now less glamorous form with a much longer history persists: food
writing. In this course we will track some important genres of food writing over the last 100 years or so. We
will examine how not just food but cultural discourses about food and the world it circulates in are
consumed and produced. We will read recipes and reviews; blogs and extracts from cookbooks, memoirs
and biographies; texts on food history and policy; academic and popular feature writing. Simultaneously we
will also produce food writing of our own in a number of genres. 6 credits; ARP, WR2; Spring; Arnab
Chakladar
ENGL 254 Fictional Worlds What makes the imaginary world created by a novel feel “real”? What aspects
of narrative contribute to our sense of being immersed in a coherent and convincing universe? From the
Victorians who addressed letters to Mr. Sherlock Holmes at 221B Baker Street, to fans of a Middle Earth
that now encompasses multiple books and films, readers have always been drawn to narratives that create
a place that seems capacious and vivid enough to enter. In this course, we will look at world‐building from
the eighteenth century through the present, comparing novels to other contemporary media in order to
develop an understanding of the way in which the impulse towards “realism” has shaped narrative in a
variety of different forms. Works to be studied include books and stories by Daniel Defoe, A. Conan
Doyle, J.R.R. Tolkien, and Octavia Butler, as well as Villeneuve’s film of Dune. 3 credits; LA; Fall; Alison
Byerly
ENGL 256 Ireland Program: Irish History and Culture In this course we will examine the beliefs, practices,
and relationships that shaped the Irish historical experience, providing students with an historical
grounding for their explorations and studies in Ireland. In addition to history and politics, topics will include
language, folklore, music, and visual culture. 6 credits; LA, WR2, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
ENGL 258 Playwrights of Color: Taking the Stage This course examines work by U.S. playwrights of color
from the 1950s to the present, focusing on questions of race, performance, and self‐representation. We
will consider opportunities and limitations of the commercial theater, Off‐Off Broadway, ethnic theaters,
and non‐traditional performance spaces. Playwrights may include Alice Childress, Lorraine Hansberry, Amiri
Baraka, Ntozake Shange, Luis Valdez, Cherrie Moraga, August Wilson, David Henry Hwang, Philip Gotanda,
Maria Irene Fornes, Anna Deavere Smith, and Chay Yew. We will watch selected film adaptations and
attend a live performance when possible. 6 credits; LA, WR2, IDS; Spring; Nancy J Cho
ENGL 265 News Stories This journalism course explores the process of moving from event to news story.
Students will study and write different forms of journalism (including news, reviews, features, interviews,
investigative pieces, and images), critique one another’s writing, and revise their pieces for a final portfolio
of professional work. 6 credits; ARP, WR2; Winter; Susan Jaret McKinstry
ENGL 266 Research Writing This writing‐rich course will address techniques for designing an extended
research project and using that research to write in a variety of genres. Students will begin the term by
designing an overall research topic in an area of their interests (not necessarily limited to literary studies or
the humanities). Over the course of the term, students will research this topic independently while the class
examines how different audiences and purposes determine the ways that writers use evidence, organize
information, and convey their ideas. Writing assignments throughout the term will draw on students’
research and may include project proposals, literature reviews, blog posts, op‐ed pieces, and posters. 6
credits; NE, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23

165
ENGL 270 Short Story Workshop An introduction to the writing of the short story (prior familiarity with the
genre of the short story is expected of class members). Each student will write and have discussed in class
three stories (from 1,500 to 6,000 words in length) and give constructive suggestions, including written
critiques, for revising the stories written by other members of the class. Attention will be paid to all the
elements of fiction: characterization, point of view, conflict, setting, dialogue, etc. Prerequisite: One prior 6‐
credit English course. 6 credits; S/CR/NC; ARP, WR2; Fall, Winter; Gregory B Smith
ENGL 271 Poetry Workshop This workshop offers you ways of developing poetic craft, voice, and vision in a
small‐group setting. Your poetry and individual expression is the heart and soul of the course. Through
intensive writing and revision of poems written in a variety of styles and forms, you will create a significant
portfolio. Prerequisite: One prior 6 credit English course. 6 credits; ARP, WR2; Spring; Christopher M Martin
ENGL 274 Ireland Program: Modern Irish Literature in Ireland In Dublin we will read and discuss works by
Joyce, Frank O’Connor, and Eavan Boland; in Galway, poems by Yeats; and in Northern Ireland, works by
Seamus Heaney, Ciaran Carson, and Brian Friel, among others. We will also meet with writers and attend
readings, lectures, films, and plays. 6 credits; LA, IS, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
ENGL 278 London Program: Shakespeare's England This course concentrates on the relationship between
the works of Shakespeare and his contemporaries, the world in which they lived, and the vitality of
performance. Particular attention will be paid to Tudor and Stuart historical sites as students explore
England through the lens of Renaissance literature and the literature through the lens of Renaissance
England. 6 credits; LA, WR2, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
ENGL 279 London Program: Urban Field Studies A combination of background readings, guided site visits,
and personal exploration will give students tools for understanding the history of multicultural London.
Starting with the city's early history and moving to the present, students will gain an understanding of how
the city has been defined and transformed over time and of the complex cultural narratives that shape its
standing as a global metropolis. 6 credits; S/CR/NC; ARP; Winter; Peter J Balaam
ENGL 281 London Program: London as City: Londinium to the Anthropocene Readings in literature, urban
studies, and the environmental humanities will ground practical exercises helping students to explore
cosmopolitan theories of walking, mapping, paying attention, and reading the city. Honing practices of
journeying, observing, curating, and collecting, students will make themselves locally expert on one or
more of London’s streets or neighborhoods. Designated film screenings, lectures, exhibits, and the natural
and built environment will help us to read London’s ever‐changing human text over the last two millenia.
What human processes are at work on any street in London; and how might they include you? Prerequisite:
Participation in OCS London Program. 6 credits; LA, WR2, IS; Winter; Peter J Balaam
ENGL 282 London Program: London Theater Students will attend productions of both classic and
contemporary plays in London and Stratford‐on‐Avon and do related reading. Class discussions will focus on
dramatic genres and themes, dramaturgy, acting styles, and design. Guest speakers may include actors,
critics, and directors. Students will take backstage tours, keep a theater journal, and work on theater
criticism and reviews. 6 credits; LA, WR2, IS; Winter; Peter J Balaam
ENGL 285 Textual Technologies from Parchment to Pixel As readers, we rarely consider the technologies,
practices, and transactions that deliver us our texts. This course introduces students to the material study
of writing, manuscripts, books, printing, and digital media. It attends to the processes of copying, revision,
editing, and circulation; familiarizes students with the disciplines of descriptive bibliography, paleography,
and textual criticism; and introduces the principles of editing, in both print and electronic media. It offers
hands‐on practice in most of these areas. 6 credits; HI, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23

166
ENGL 288 California Program: The Literature of California An intensive study of writing and film that
explores California both as a place (or rather, a mosaic of places) and as a continuing metaphor‐‐whether of
promise or disintegration‐‐for the rest of the country. Authors read will include John Muir, Raymond
Chandler, Nathanael West, Robinson Jeffers, John Steinbeck, Joan Didion and Octavia Butler. Films will
include: Sunset Boulevard, Chinatown, Zoot Suit, Boys inthe Hood and Lala Land.
6 credits; LA, IDS; Winter; Michael J Kowalewski
ENGL 295 Critical Methods Required of students majoring in English, this course explores practical and
theoretical issues in literary analysis and contemporary criticism. Not open to first year students.
Prerequisite: One English Foundations course and one prior 6 credit English course. 6 credits; LA, WR2; Fall,
Spring; Peter J Balaam, Susan Jaret McKinstry
ENGL 310 Shakespeare II Continuing the work begun in Shakespeare I, this course delves deeper into the
Shakespeare canon. More difficult and obscure plays are studied alongside some of the more famous ones.
While focusing principally on the plays themselves as works of art, the course also explores their social,
intellectual, and theatrical contexts, as well as the variety of critical response they have engendered.
Prerequisite: One English Foundations course and English 144 or 244. 6 credits; LA, WR2; Not offered 2022‐
23
ENGL 319 The Rise of the Novel This course traces the development of a sensational, morally dubious genre
that emerged in the eighteenth‐century: the novel. We will read some of the most entertaining, best‐selling
novels written during the first hundred years of the form, paying particular attention to the novel’s concern
with courtship and marriage, writing and reading, the real and the fantastic. Among the questions we will
ask: What is a novel? What distinguished the early novel from autobiography, history, travel narrative, and
pornography? How did this genre come to be associated with women? How did early novelists respond to
eighteenth‐century debates about the dangers of reading fiction? Authors include Aphra Behn, Daniel
Defoe, Eliza Haywood, Samuel Richardson, Henry Fielding, Laurence Sterne, and Jane Austen. Prerequisite:
One English foundations course and one other 6 credit English course. 6 credits; LA, WR2; Winter; Jessica L
Leiman
ENGL 323 Romanticism and Reform Mass protests, police brutality, reactionary politicians, imprisoned
journalists, widespread unemployment, and disease were all features of the Romantic era in Britain as well
as our own time. We will explore how its writers brilliantly advocate for empathy, liberty, and social justice
in the midst of violence and upheaval. Readings will include works by Blake, Wordsworth, Coleridge, Byron,
Keats, Percy and Mary Shelley, and their contemporaries. Prerequisite: One English foundations course and
one other 6 credit English course. 6 credits; LA, WR2; Fall; Constance Walker
ENGL 327 Victorian Novel Puzzled about nineteenth century novels, Henry James asks, 'But what do such
large loose baggy monsters with their queer elements of the accidental and the arbitrary, artistically
mean?'' (“Preface,” The Tragic Muse). What, indeed? Practicing close reading, surface reading, and distant
reading, we will examine the prose, design, and illustrations of Victorian editions, and ask how big data
might help us define and interpret the nineteenth century novel. Authors might include George Eliot,
Charles Dickens, Emily Bronte, Charlotte Bronte, E.M. Forster, Lewis Carroll. Prerequisite: One English
foundations course and one additional 6 credit English course or instructor consent. 6 credits; LA, WR2,
QRE; Not offered 2022‐23
ENGL 328 Victorian Poetry Living in an era of rapid progress and profound doubt, Victorian poets are
prolific, challenging, inventive, and insistent that poetry address contemporary questions of social inequity,
science, gender, nation, self, race, and knowledge itself. Readings will include works by Alfred Tennyson,

167
Robert Browning, Oscar Wilde, Matthew Arnold, Dante Rossetti, Christina Rossetti, Charles Dodgson (Lewis
Carroll), Gerard Manley Hopkins, and others, as well as cultural images and documents. Prerequisite: One
English foundations course and one other 6 credit English course. 6 credits; LA, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
ENGL 329 The City in American Literature How do American authors "write the city"? The city as both
material reality and metaphor has fueled the imagination of diverse novelists, poets, and playwrights,
through tales of fallen women and con men, immigrant dreams, and visions of apocalypse. After studying
the realistic tradition of urban fiction at the turn of the twentieth century, we will turn to modern and
contemporary re‐imaginings of the city, with a focus on Chicago, New York and Los Angeles. Selected films,
photographs, and historical sources will supplement our investigations of how writers face the challenge of
representing urban worlds. Prerequisite: One English foundations course and one other 6 credit English
course, or instructor permission. 6 credits; LA, WR2; Spring; Nancy J Cho
ENGL 332 Faulkner, Hemingway, and Fitzgerald An intensive study of the novels and short fiction of William
Faulkner, Ernest Hemingway, and F. Scott Fitzgerald. The course will focus on the ethos of experimentation
and the "homemade" quality of these innovative stylists who shaped the course of American modernism.
Works read will be primarily from the twenties and thirties and will include The Sound and the Fury, In Our
Time, Light in August, The Great Gatsby, The Sun Also Rises, and Go Down, Moses. Prerequisite: One English
foundations course and one additional 6 credit English course. 6 credits; LA, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
ENGL 338 Dickinson, Moore, Bishop An intensive study of lyric invention and innovation in the work of
Emily Dickinson, Marianne Moore, and Elizabeth Bishop. Starting with formalist readings and historicizing
the poetic subjects they pursued in common (self and society, loss and knowledge, nature, gender, the
senses, the body), we will explore their practice, reception, and influence in relation to changing Modernist
poetics, 1860 to 1970, and to specifics of place: Amherst, Brooklyn, Nova Scotia, Key West, and Brazil.
Prerequisite: One English foundations course and one additional 6 credit English course or instructor
permission. 6 credits; LA; Spring; Peter J Balaam
ENGL 350 The Postcolonial Novel: Forms and Contexts Authors from the colonies and ex‐colonies of
England have complicated our understandings of the locations, forms and indeed the language of the
contemporary English novel. This course will examine these questions and the theoretical and interpretive
frames in which these writers have often been placed, and probe their place in the global marketplace (and
awards stage). We will read a number of major novelists of the postcolonial era from Africa, South Asia, the
Caribbean and the diaspora as well as some of the central works of postcolonial literary criticism.
Prerequisite: One English foundations course and one additional 6 credit English course. 6 credits; LA, WR2,
IS; Fall; Arnab Chakladar
ENGL 352 Toni Morrison: Novelist Morrison exposes the limitations of the language of fiction, but refuses to
be constrained by them. Her quirky, inimitable, and invariably memorable characters are fully committed to
the protocols of the narratives that define them. She is fearless in her choice of subject matter and
boundless in her thematic range. And the novelistic site becomes a stage for Morrison's virtuoso
performances. It is to her well‐crafted novels that we turn our attention in this course. Prerequisite: One
English foundations course and one other 6 credit English course or instructor permission. 6 credits; LA,
WR2, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
ENGL 359 World Literature in the Twenty‐First Century Our focus will be on contemporary writers who tend
to localize the global and/or globalize the local in their decidedly textured fiction and nonfiction published
since 2001. Selected writers include Zinzi Clemmons, Ta‐Nehisi Coates, J.M. Coetzee, Junot Diaz, Esi
Edugyan, Nuruddin Farah, Yaa Gyasi, Dinaw Mengestu, Chigozie Obioma, and Zadie Smith. Prerequisite:

168
One English foundations course and one additional 6 credit English course or instructor permission. 6
credits; LA, WR2, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
ENGL 362 Narrative Theory "Does the world really present itself to perception in the form of well‐made
stories?" asks Hayden White, metahistoriographer. To try to answer that question, we will read
contemporary narrative theory by critics from several disciplines and apply their theories to literary texts,
films, and cultural objects such as graphic novels, television shows, advertisements, and music videos.
Prerequisite: One 6‐credit foundations course plus one 6‐credit English course or Cinema and Media Studies
210, 211, 214 or 243. 6 credits; LA, WR2; Winter; Susan Jaret McKinstry
ENGL 366 The Carleton Miscellany An in‐depth study of the Carleton Miscellany, a nationally renowned
literary quarterly once described as “the nation’s most delightful magazine.” Published at the college for
two decades, from 1960‐1980, the Miscellany featured the work of a dozen Pulitzer Prize winning authors
and that of numerous Carleton faculty. The magazine had a cosmopolitan, international perspective but
also reflected its origins in a small, leafy Midwestern college town. We will explore the significance of the
Miscellany in the context of the history of “little magazines.” The class will include a variety of student
research assignments, some of them from the Carleton archives. Prerequisite: One English foundations
course and one additional 6 credit English course. 6 credits; LA, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
ENGL 370 Advanced Fiction Workshop An advanced course in the writing of fiction. Students will write
three to four short stories or novel chapters which will be read and critiqued by the class. Prerequisite:
English 160, 161, 263, 265, 270, 271, 273, Cinema and Media Studies 271, 278, 279, Cross Cultural Studies
270 or Theater 246. 6 credits; S/CR/NC; ARP, WR2; Spring; Gregory B Smith
ENGL 371 Advanced Poetry Workshop In this workshop, students choose to write poems from a broad
range of forms, from sonnets to spoken word, from ghazals to slam, from free‐verse to blues. Over the ten
weeks, each poet will write and revise their own collection of poems. Student work is the centerpiece of the
course, but readings from a diverse selection of contemporary poets will be used to expand each student’s
individual poetic range, and to explore the power of poetic language. For students with some experience in
writing poetry, this workshop further develops your craft and poetic voice and vision. Prerequisite: English
160, 161, 263, 265, 270, 271, 273, Cinema and Media Studies 271, 278, 279, Cross Cultural Studies 270 or
Theater 246. 6 credits; ARP, WR2; Fall; Gregory G Hewett
ENGL 381 London as a City: Londinium to the Anthropocene Readings in literature, urban studies, and the
environmental humanities will ground practical exercises helping students to explore cosmopolitan theories
of walking, mapping, paying attention, and reading the city. Honing practices of journeying, observing,
curating, and collecting, students will make themselves locally expert on one or more of London’s streets or
neighborhoods. Designated film screenings, lectures, exhibits, and the natural and built environment will
help us to read London’s ever‐changing human text over the last two millenia. What human processes are
at work on any street in London; and how might they include you? Prerequisite: One English foundations
course and one other 6 credit English course or permission of instructor. 6 credits; LA, WR2, IS; Winter;
Peter J Balaam
ENGL 395 Seductive Fictions Stories of virtue in distress and innocence ruined preoccupied English novelists
of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. This course will focus on the English seduction novel,
considering the following questions: What was the allure of the seduction plot? What does it reveal about
sexual relations, gender, power, and class during this period? How does the seduction plot address and
provoke concerns about novel‐reading itself during a time when the genre was considered both an
instrument of education and an agent of moral corruption? Authors include: Eliza Haywood, Samuel

169
Richardson, Susanna Rowson, and Bram Stoker. Prerequisite: English 295 and one 300 level English course.
6 credits; LA, WR2; Spring; Jessica L Leiman
ENGL 395 The Twenty‐First Century Novel This seminar focuses on fictional masterpieces published since
2005. We will map out the threads of multiple storylines and track the variety of voices and dialects in
Verghese's Cutting for Stone, Adichie's Americanah, and James's A Brief History of Seven Killings. The heft
and scope of these three long narratives will be complemented by shorter, but equally multilayered, ones
including Danticat's Claire of the Sea Light, Selasi's Ghana Must Go, Mengestu's The Beautiful Things That
Heaven Bears, and Diaz's The Brief Wondrous Life of Oscar Wao. Prerequisite: English 295 and one 300‐level
English course. 6 credits; LA, WR2, IS; Fall; Kofi Owusu
ENGL 400 Integrative Exercise Senior English majors may fulfill the integrative exercise by completing one of
the four options: the Colloquium Option (a group option in which participants discuss, analyze and write
about a thematically coherent list of literary works); the Research Essay Option (an extended essay on a
topic of the student's own devising); the Creative Option (creation of a work of literary art); or the Project
Option (creation of an individual or group multidisciplinary project). The Research Essay Option is open to
students who have completed a senior seminar in the major by the end of fall term senior year. The
Creative Option is open only to students who have completed at least two creative writing courses (one of
which must be at the 300 level) by the end of fall term senior year. 6 credits; S/NC; Winter, Spring

Environmental Studies
The central mission of Carleton's Environmental Studies Program is to educate the next generation
of environmental scholars and professionals in the fundamental scientific, ecological, social, ethical,
political, and economic forces that govern environmental issues and the long-term quality and
viability of society. The complexities of environmental problems dictate that study of the
environment be based in multiple disciplines to provide students with skill sets and knowledge
bases in the following areas: scientific principles as applied to the environment, the political,
economic, social and cultural dimensions of environmental problems, the historical and ethical
context for environmental problems and policy, and literary and artistic explorations of the
environment. Students who major in Environmental Studies can gain a broad knowledge base in the
natural sciences, social sciences and the humanities, which is intended to help them understand the
complex environmental issues faced by societies around the world.
The major is designed to help students make connections across these key knowledge bases, while
also allowing students to focus their studies within specific interdisciplinary content areas supported
by the curriculum. Currently those focus areas include: Conservation and Development, Food and
Agriculture, Energy and Climate, Environmental Justice, Landscapes and Perception, and Water
Resources.
The Environmental Studies major prepares students for meaningful involvement in a wide array of
environmental and governmental organizations, as well as for graduate study in many
environmental fields, law, public policy, and other areas of inquiry.
Requirements for the Environmental Studies Major
In most cases, majors must complete 78 credits in the course categories listed below, which includes
nine credits devoted to a group-based comprehensive exercise. This comprehensive exercise is

170

described in detail on the Environmental Studies website. In exceptional circumstances, majors may
do an individual comprehensive exercise for six credits, in which case they must complete 75
credits for the major.
I. Introductory Courses (12 credits):


Introductory Lab Science Course (6 credits): Pick any one of the following:
o BIOL 126 Energy Flow in Biological Systems and Lab
o CHEM 128 Principles of Environmental Chemistry and Lab
o GEOL 110 Introduction to Geology and Lab
o GEOL 115 Climate Change in Geology and Lab (not offered in 2022‐23)
o GEOL 120 Introduction to Environmental Geology & Lab (not offered in 2022‐23)
o GEOL 125 Introduction to Field Geology and Lab
o PHYS 152 Introduction to Physics: Environmental Physics and Lab
and one of its prerequisites (Physics 131, 132, 141, 142, 143 or 145)



Introductory Economics (6 credits)
o ECON 111 Principles of Microeconomics. This requirement may be waived with an
Economics AP score of 5.

II. Quantitative Methods (12 credits):


Take ENTS 120 Introduction to Geospatial Analysis

and one of the following:






STAT 120 (formerly MATH 215) Introduction to Statistics or
STAT 230 (formerly MATH 245) Applied Regression Analysis or
MATH 240 (formerly MATH 265) Probability or
STAT 250 (formerly MATH 275) Introduction to Statistical Inference (6 credits).
This requirement may be waived with a MATH Stats AP Score of 4 or 5, and with the completion of
a higher level STAT course.

III. Research Design and Methods (3 credits)


ENTS 232 Research Design and Methods

IV. Core Courses (18 credits): Take all of the following:




BIOL 210 Global Change Biology
ECON 271 Economics of Natural Resources and the Environment
HIST 205 American Environmental History

V. Electives (24 credits):
Twelve credits should consist of Society, Culture, Policy electives and twelve credits should consist
of Environmental Science electives. Any one of these elective courses may be used to satisfy the
300-level topical seminar requirement in section VI, below.

171

In addition, students will work with their adviser to develop an interdisciplinary focus within
environmental studies, such as food and agriculture, conservation and development, energy and
climate, landscapes and perception, environmental justice, or water resources. This focus will be
exhibited and explained in an e-portfolio (the “ENTS Profile”), to be completed by the end of Fall
term senior year. Electives should be chosen to reflect this focus.




Society, Culture and Policy: Take 12 credits from the following list:
o AMST 230 The American Sublime: Landscape, Character & National Destiny in Nineteenth
Century America (not offered in 2022‐23)
o AMST 240 The Midwest and the American Imagination (not offered in 2022‐23)
o AMST 287 California Program: California Art and Visual Culture
o ARTH 267 Gardens in China and Japan
o ARTS 113 Field Drawing
o ARTS 211 Topics in Art and the Environment: Drawing the Anthropocene (not offered in
2022‐23)
o ARTS 212 Studio Art Seminar in the South Pacific: Mixed‐Media Drawing
o ARTS 275 Studio Art Program: The Physical and Cultural Environment
o ECON 240 Microeconomics of Development
o ECON 268 Economics of Cost Benefit Analysis (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 236 American Nature Writing (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 247 The American West (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 248 Visions of California (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 288 California Program: The Literature of California
o ENTS 210 Environmental Justice
o ENTS 215 Environmental Ethics (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENTS 244 Biodiversity Conservation and Development
o ENTS 248 Environmental Memoir
o ENTS 250 Food, Forests & Resilence
o ENTS 251 Field Study in Sustainability in Oaxaca
o ENTS 307 Wilderness Field Studies: Grand Canyon (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENTS 310 Topics in Environmental Law and Policy (not offered in 2022‐23)
o HIST 306 American Wilderness (not offered in 2022‐23)
o HIST 308 American Cities and Nature
o POSC 268 Global Environmental Politics and Policy
o POSC 274 Globalization, Pandemics, and Human Security (not offered in 2022‐23)
o POSC 280 COVID‐19 and Globalization (not offered in 2022‐23)
o POSC 333 Global Social Changes and Sustainability* (not offered in 2022‐23)
o POSC 379 Political Economy and Ecology of S.E. Asia: Diversity of Social Ecological Systems
in Southeast Asia (not offered in 2022‐23)
o RELG 239 Religion & American Landscape (not offered in 2022‐23)
o RELG 243 Native American Religious Freedom
o SOAN 203 Anthropology of Good Intentions (not offered in 2022‐23)
o SOAN 233 Anthropology of Food
o SOAN 323 Mother Earth: Women, Development and the Environment (not offered in 2022‐
23)
o SOAN 333 Environmental Anthropology (not offered in 2022‐23)
Environmental Science: Take 12 credits from the following list:
o BIOL 215 Agroecology (not offered in 2022‐23)
o BIOL 216 Agroecology Lab (not offered in 2022‐23)
o BIOL 224 Landscape Ecology

172
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o

BIOL 225 Landscape Ecology Laboratory
BIOL 238 Entomology (not offered in 2022‐23)
BIOL 250 Australia/New Zealand Program: Marine Ecology (not offered in 2022‐23)
BIOL 252 Environmental Animal Physiology (not offered in 2022‐23)
BIOL 262 Ecological Physiology
BIOL 321 Ecosystem Ecology (not offered in 2022‐23)
BIOL 350 Evolution
BIOL 352 Population Ecology (not offered in 2022‐23)
BIOL 374 Seminar: Grassland Ecology (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENTS 225 Carbon and Climate (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENTS 250 Food, Forests & Resilence
ENTS 251 Field Study in Sustainability in Oaxaca
ENTS 254 Topics in Landscape Ecology
ENTS 274 Applied Spatial Analysis & Lab (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENTS 288 Abrupt Climate Change (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENTS 289 Climate Change and Human Health
GEOL 210 Geomorphology and Lab
GEOL 245 “When the Earth Shook…” Earthquakes in Human History and Lab (not offered in
2022‐23)
GEOL 258 Geology of Soils and Lab (not offered in 2022‐23)
GEOL 340 Hydrogeology: Groundwater
GEOL 370 Geochemistry of Natural Waters (not offered in 2022‐23)

VI. Topical Seminar (6 credits):
All students must take one 300-level seminar that includes an individual research paper. This course
may also count as an elective. Courses that fulfill this requirement are:










BIOL 355 Seminar: The Plant‐Animal Interface (not offered in 2022‐23)
BIOL 374 Seminar: Grassland Ecology (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENTS 307 Wilderness Field Studies: Grand Canyon (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENTS 310 Topics in Environmental Law and Policy (not offered in 2022‐23)
GEOL 340 Hydrogeology: Groundwater
HIST 306 American Wilderness (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 308 American Cities and Nature
POSC 333 Global Social Changes and Sustainability* (not offered in 2022‐23)
SOAN 323 Mother Earth: Women, Development and the Environment (not offered in 2022‐23)

VII. Senior Seminar/Comprehensive Exercise (9 credits): Most students will take a 3-credit
senior seminar, which is normally offered fall term, and then pursue a 6-credit group-based
comprehensive exercise the following term. In exceptional circumstances, students may pursue an
individual comprehensive exercise.




ENTS 395 Senior Seminar
ENTS 400 Integrative Exercise
ENTS 400 Integrative Exercise: Individual option

173

Environmental Studies Courses
ENTS 110 Environment and Society This course offers an interdisciplinary introduction to a number of the
pressing environmental changes currently facing human societies around the world. We will seek to
understand and integrate the social, economic, scientific and political dimensions of these challenges.
Emphasis will be placed on understanding the complexity of environmental issues and the interdisciplinary
nature of the search for appropriate solutions. Topics will include global warming, population pressures,
energy use, industrial waste and pollution, biological diversity, and sustainable agriculture. 6 credits; SI; Not
offered 2022‐23
ENTS 120 Introduction to Geospatial Analysis & Lab Spatial data analysis using Geographic Information
Systems (GIS), remote sensing, global positioning, and related technologies are increasingly important for
understanding and analyzing a wide range of biophysical, social, and economic phenomena. This course
serves as an overview and introduction to the concepts, algorithms, issues, and methods in describing,
analyzing, and modeling geospatial data over a range of application areas. 6 credits; QRE, SI; Spring
ENTS 210 Environmental Justice The environmental justice movement seeks greater participation by
marginalized communities in environmental policy, and equity in the distribution of environmental harms
and benefits. This course will examine the meaning of "environmental justice," the history of the
movement, the empirical foundation for the movement's claims, and specific policy questions. Our focus is
the United States, but students will have the opportunity to research environmental justice in other
countries. 6 credits; SI, QRE, IDS; Fall; Colleen M Carpenter
ENTS 212 Global Food Systems The course offers a survey of the world's food systems‐‐and its critics‐‐from
the initial domestication of plants and animals to our day. We will begin by examining the critical
theoretical and foundational issues on the subject, and then turn to a series of case studies that illuminate
major themes around the world. Topics will include land and animal husbandry, the problem of food
security, food politics, the Green Revolution, biotechnology, and the implications of global climate change.
Throughout the course, students will assess and seek to integrate differing disciplinary and methodological
approaches. The class will include field experiences. 6 credits; SI, QRE, IS; Winter; Tsegaye H Nega
ENTS 215 Environmental Ethics This course is an introduction to the central ethical debates in
environmental policy and practice, as well as some of the major traditions of environmental thought. It
investigates such questions as whether we can have moral duties towards animals, ecosystems, or future
generations; what is the ethical basis for wilderness preservation; and what is the relationship between
environmentalism and social justice. 6 credits; HI; Not offered 2022‐23
ENTS 225 Carbon and Climate This course will focus on the interconnections between the Earth’s carbon
cycle and climate system. Particular interest will be given to how Earth system processes involved in the
carbon cycle operate on geologic timescales and how these systems are responding to anthropogenic
emissions. Required weekly laboratories will explore carbon cycle processes in local environments and will
include outdoor field work, lab analyses, and computer modeling. Prerequisite: One lab science course. 6
credits; LS, QRE; Not offered 2022‐23
ENTS 232 Research Methods in Environmental Studies This course covers various methodologies that are
used to prosecute interdisciplinary academic research relating to the environment. Among the topics
covered are: identification of a research question, methods of analysis, hypothesis testing, and effective
rhetorical methods, both oral and written. 3 credits; FSR, QRE; Fall; Mark T Kanazawa

174
ENTS 244 Biodiversity Conservation and Development How can the need for intensive human social and
economic development be reconciled with the conservation of biodiversity? This course explores the wide
range of actions that people take at a local, national, and international level to address this question. We
will use political ecology and conservation biology as theoretical frameworks to examine the role of
traditional and indigenous approaches to biodiversity conservation as well as contemporary debates about
integrated conservation development across a spectrum of cultures in North America, Africa, Latin America,
and Asia. 6 credits; SI, QRE, IS; Winter; Tsegaye H Nega
ENTS 248 Environmental Memoir Through close readings of contemporary and classic environmental
memoirs, this course explores the connections between nature and identity; race, belonging, and
landscape; and memory, justice, and hope. Issues of environmental justice and injustice will serve as a key
interpretive lens for approaching the texts. Authors include Robin Wall Kimmerer, Aldo Leopold, Terry
Tempest Williams, and J. Drew Lanham. 6 credits; NE, WR2; Fall; Colleen M Carpenter
ENTS 250 Food, Forests & Resilence The course will explore how the idea of sustainability is complicated
when evaluated through a socio‐ecological framework that combines anthropology and ecology. To
highlight this complexity, the course is designed to provide a comparative framework to understand and
analyze sustainable socio‐ecological propositions in Minnesota and Oaxaca. Key conceptual areas explored
include: coupled human‐natural systems, resilience (ecological and cultural), self‐determination, and social
justice across stakeholders. The course includes a series of fieldtrips to nearby projects of interest. This
course is part of the OCS winter break Oaxaca program, involving two linked courses in fall and winter
terms. This class is the first class in the sequence. Prerequisite: One of the following is recommended:
Environmental Studies 110, Sociology/Anthropology 110, Sociology/Anthropology 250, Biology 210, History
170 or History 205. 6 credits; SI, IS; Fall; Daniel Hernández, Constanza C Ocampo‐Raeder
ENTS 251 Field Study in Sustainability in Oaxaca A field‐based investigation of socio‐ecological systems in
Oaxaca, Mexico that will allow students to draw compaisons with similar systems in Minnesota. During
winter break, we will visit the city of Oaxaca and neighboring villages to document and research systems of
agriculture, sustainable forestry, and ecotourism, emphasizing the integration of methodologies in
anthropology and ecology. Following the winter break trip, students will complete and present their
research projects. This course is the second part of a two term sequence beginning with Environmental
Studies 250. Prerequisite: Prior term registration in Environmental Studies 250. At least one term of
introductory Spanish (or equivalent proficiency) is required. 6 credits; SI, IS; Winter; Daniel Hernández,
Constanza C Ocampo‐Raeder
ENTS 254 Topics in Landscape Ecology Landscape ecology is an interdisciplinary field that combines the
spatial approach of the geographer with the functional approach of the ecologist to understand the ways in
which landscape composition and structure affects ecological processes, species abundance, and
distribution. Topics include collecting and referencing spatial data at broad scales, Geographic Information
Systems (GIS), landscape metrics, simulating change in landscape pattern, landscape connectivity and meta‐
population dynamics, and reserve design. Prerequisite: Biology 125 and 126. 6 credits; QRE, SI, IS; Spring;
Tsegaye H Nega
ENTS 255 Ecology & Anthropology Tanzania Program: Field Methods in Ecology and Anthropology This
course enables students with interests in both Ecology and Anthropology to conduct studies in partnership
with Tanzanian host communities. The challenges facing cultural groups and socio‐ecological systems in
northern Tanzania are inherently multi‐disciplinary, and students must be able to bridge disciplines. This
Field Methods course provides students with a common set of skills from both the ecological and
anthropological disciplines to be applied in their Independent Study projects. Topics covered in the course

175
include: introduction to research ethics; conducting a literature review; design and implementation of data
collection protocols and survey questionnaires; summary, analysis and presentation of qualitative and
quantitative data. Prerequisite: Participation in Ecology & Anthropology Tanzania Program. 3‐4 credits; NE;
Fall; Anna B Estes
ENTS 274 Applied Spatial Analysis & Lab This course offers students with existing skills in data manipulation
and analysis using Geographical Information Systems (GIS) and Remote Sensing to expand their knowledge
of spatial information science and GIS procedures. Students will develop and apply advanced data analysis
techniques to propose, construct and carry out a small research projects in an area of interest. The course
has a strong practical focus, and students will gain experience in modeling spatially correlated data,
quantifying spatial association and autocorrelation, landscape connectivity, spatial point patterns and
exploratory analysis. Prerequisite: Environmental Studies 120 or consent of the instructor. 6 credits; LS,
QRE; Not offered 2022‐23
ENTS 288 Abrupt Climate Change Abrupt climate change is very fast change, related to "tipping points" and
thresholds, evident in current and historical climate records. Includes interpretation of historical climate
data and measurement methods, evolving theories for abrupt change, the role of complex earth systems
processes, and trends in global climate change today. The course will address our future through examining
cases studies on past human civilizations and discussion of how to reduce our vulnerability to an unstable
future climate. Includes a term‐long project at the intersection of abrupt climate change and an issue of
human concern. Prerequisite: One introductory course in Biology 125 or 126, or Chemistry 123 or 128 or
any 100‐level Geology, or Physics (two five‐week courses or one ten week course from 131 through 165). 6
credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐23
ENTS 289 Climate Change and Human Health This course will survey the relationship between climate
change and human health. The course will begin by exploring the science of the Earth’s climate before
turning to an exploration of topics that illuminate the intimate relationship between climate change and
human health. These include short‐lived climate forcers and the climate and health impact of mitigation
measures, extreme heat/drought, mosquito‐borne diseases, indoor air pollution/biomass
combustion/cookstoves, and biodiversity conservation. Project proposals for the off‐campus component
will be developed. This course is part of the OCS winter break program involving two linked courses in fall
and winter terms. This course is the first in the sequence, students must register for Chemistry 289 winter
term. Prerequisite: One introductory course in Biology 125 or 126, Chemistry 123 or 128, any 100‐level
Geology, or Physics (two five‐week courses or one ten week course from 131‐165). 6 credits; SI, QRE; Fall;
Deborah S Gross, Tsegaye H Nega
ENTS 307 Wilderness Field Studies: Grand Canyon This course is the second half of a two‐course sequence
focused on the study of wilderness in American society and culture. The course will begin with an Off‐
Campus Studies program at Grand Canyon National Park, where we will learn about the natural and human
history of the Grand Canyon region, examine contemporary issues facing the park, meet with officials from
the National Park Service and other local experts, conduct research, and experience the park through hiking
and camping. The course will culminate in spring term with the completion and presentation of a major
research project. Prerequisite: History 306 and Acceptance in Wilderness Studies at the Grand Canyon OCS
program. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
ENTS 310 Topics in Environmental Law and Policy This seminar will examine topical issues in domestic and
international environmental law and policy. We will aim to understand how environmental laws work to
achieve policy objectives, with attention also to debates about the role of markets and community‐based
environmental management. The specific topics may change from year to year, but may include approaches

176
to sustainable development, sustainable agriculture, protection of endangered species, and conservation
and management of water resources. This course has no prerequisites and is suitable for students of
environmental studies, political science, international relations and political economy. 6 credits; SI; Not
offered 2022‐23
ENTS 355 Ecology & Anthropology Tanzania Program: Ecology and Conservation of Savanna Ecosystems in
Northern Tanzania This course focuses on the foundational principles necessary to understand the ecology
and conservation of savanna ecosystems in northern Tanzania, and the important roles that people and
protected areas play within them. The course is based on the premise that a thorough understanding of
Tanzania’s ecosystems and the challenges facing them cannot be achieved without understanding the
human and political contexts in which they exist. The course incorporates primary literature, frequent guest
lecturers, stakeholder interactions and student‐facilitated discussions. The experiential, site‐based
approach allows students to gain insight into the practical application of ecological concepts in monitoring
and maintaining savanna ecosystems. Prerequisite: One Anthropology, Biology or Environmental Studies
course or instructor consent. 7‐8 credits; NE; Fall; Anna B Estes
ENTS 395 Senior Seminar This seminar will focus on preparing Environmental Studies majors to undertake
the senior comprehensive exercise. The seminar will be organized around a topic to‐be‐determined and will
involve intensive discussion and the preparation of a detailed research proposal for the comps experience.
The course is required for all Environmental Studies majors choosing the group comps option. Prerequisite:
Completion of all other Environmental Studies core courses except comps. 3 credits; SI; Fall; Mark T
Kanazawa
ENTS 400 Integrative Exercise In this course, ENTS majors complete a group‐based comprehensive exercise.
Each group is expected to research and execute a group project on the topic chosen by the group, under
the guidance of an ENTS faculty member. Toward the end of winter term, all groups present their research
at a symposium sponsored by ENTS. Prerequisite: Environmental Studies 395. 6 credits; S/NC; Winter

European Studies
The European Studies minor provides an intellectual meeting ground for students interested in
exploring Europe from a variety of disciplinary and interdisciplinary perspectives. Drawing courses
from a number of different departments, the program in European Studies allows students to
integrate their study of a European language and off-campus experiences in Europe with a coherent
set of courses on campus to achieve a greater understanding of both new and old Europes.
Requirements for the European Studies Minor
The total number of credits required to complete the minor is 45.


One of the following gateway courses:
o EUST 110 The Nation State in Europe (not offered in 2022‐23)
o EUST 111 The Age of Cathedrals (not offered in 2022‐23)
o HIST 140 The Age of Revolutions: Modern Europe, 1789‐1914 (not offered in 2022‐23)
o HIST 141 Europe in the Twentieth Century (not offered in 2022‐23)



Four transnational supporting courses that
o

approach a theme or issue from a pan‐European perspective OR

177
o
o

compare European countries or regions OR
compare Europe (or parts of Europe) with another part of the world.

These courses will engage in an examination of such overarching issues as the relation
between individual and community, cultural and linguistic diversity, and globalization. The
list below is not exhaustive; students should consult with the minor director regarding other
courses that may fulfill this requirement.
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o

ARTH 101 Introduction to Art History I
ARTH 102 Introduction to Art History II
ARTH 172 Modern Art: 1890‐1945 (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARTH 235 Revival, Revelation, and Re‐animation: The Art of Europe's "Renaissance" (not
offered in 2022‐23)
ARTH 236 Baroque Art (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARTH 240 Art Since 1945
ARTH 245 Modern Architecture (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARTH 247 Architecture Since 1950 (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARTH 255 Islam in the Eyes of the West (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARTH 263 European Architectural Studies Program: Prehistory to Postmodernism (not
offered in 2022‐23)
ARTH 264 European Architectural Studies Program: Managing Monuments: Issues in
Cultural Heritage Practice (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARTH 323 Idolatry (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARTH 341 Art and Democracy (not offered in 2022‐23)
CAMS 211 Film History II
CAMS 214 Film History III
CCST 270 Creative Travel Writing Workshop
ENGL 114 Introduction to Medieval Narrative
ENGL 135 Imperial Adventures (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 203 Other Worlds of Medieval English Literature (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 219 Global Shakespeare
ENGL 350 The Postcolonial Novel: Forms and Contexts
EUST 100 Allies or Enemies? America through European Eyes
EUST 159 "The Age of Isms" ‐ Ideals, Ideas and Ideologies in Modern Europe
FREN 206 Contemporary French and Francophone Culture
FREN 238 Back to the Future: French Classics Reimagined (not offered in 2022‐23)
FREN 248 Murder and Mayhem: Narratives of Suspense (not offered in 2022‐23)
FREN 255 Paris Program: Islam in France: Historical Approaches and Current Debates
FREN 257 French and Francophone Autofiction (not offered in 2022‐23)
FREN 259 Paris Program: Hybrid Paris
FREN 308 France and the African Imagination (not offered in 2022‐23)
FREN 309 Expression and Translation: Encounters with Language (not offered in 2022‐23)
FREN 347 Gender and Sexuality in the Francophone World
FREN 353 The French Chanson (not offered in 2022‐23)
FREN 357 French and Francophone Autofiction (not offered in 2022‐23)
FREN 359 Paris Program: Hybrid Paris
FREN 360 The Algerian War of Liberation and Its Representations (not offered in 2022‐23)
GERM 221 (re/ex)press yourself: Sexuality and Gender in Fin‐de‐Siècle Literature and Art
(not offered in 2022‐23)

178
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o

GWSS 243 Women's and Gender Studies in Europe Program: Situated Feminisms: Socio‐
Political Systems and Gender Issues Across Europe
GWSS 244 Women's & Gender Studies in Europe Program: Cross‐Cultural Feminist
Methodologies
GWSS 325 Women's & Gender Studies in Europe Program: Continental Feminist, Queer,
Trans* Theories
HIST 100 Exploration, Science, and Empire
HIST 137 Early Medieval Worlds in Transformation (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 138 Crusades, Mission, and the Expansion of Europe (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 139 Foundations of Modern Europe (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 140 The Age of Revolutions: Modern Europe, 1789‐1914 (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 141 Europe in the Twentieth Century (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 231 Mapping the World Before Mercator
HIST 232 Renaissance Worlds in France and Italy (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 233 The Byzantine World and Its Neighbors, 750‐ca. 1453 (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 238 The Viking World (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 239 Hunger, Public Policy and Food Provision in History (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 244 The Enlightenment and Its Legacies (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 249 Two Centuries of Tumult: Modern Central Europe (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 252 Fascism in Europe, 1919‐1945 (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 287 From Alchemy to the Atom Bomb: The Scientific Revolution and the Making of the
Modern World
HIST 332 Image Makers and Breakers in the Premodern World (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 341 The Russian Revolution and its Global Legacies (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 346 The Holocaust
HIST 347 The Global Cold War (not offered in 2022‐23)
MELA 230 Jewish Collective Memory
MUSC 211 Race, Gender, and Classical Music
MUSC 215 Western Music and its Social Ecosystems, 1830‐Present (not offered in 2022‐23)
PE 338 Sports and Globalization in London and Seville: Global Athletics (not offered in 2022‐
23)
PHIL 272 Early Modern Philosophy: Seventeenth and Eighteenth Century Philosophy
PHIL 274 Existentialism
POSC 120 Democracy and Dictatorship
POSC 238 Sport & Globalization London/Seville Pgm: Globalization and Development:
Lessons from Int'l Football (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 244 The Politics of Eurovision
POSC 247 Comparative Nationalism (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 253 Welfare Capitalisms in Post‐War Europe
POSC 255 Post‐Modern Political Thought (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 257 Marxist Political Thought
POSC 259 Justice Among Nations (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 265 Public Policy and Global Capitalism
POSC 268 Global Environmental Politics and Policy
POSC 276 Imagination in Politics: Resisting Totalitarianism
POSC 277 Religion in Politics: Conflict or Dialogue? (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 283 Separatist Movements
POSC 284 War and Peace in Northern Ireland
POSC 352 Political Theory of Alexis de Tocqueville* (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 358 Comparative Social Movements*

179
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o


POSC 359 Cosmopolitanism (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 217 Faith and Doubt in the Modern Age (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 225 Losing My Religion (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 231 From Luther to Kierkegaard (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 287 Many Marys (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 329 Modernity and Tradition
SOAN 108 In & Out of Africa: How Transnational Black Lives Matter (not offered in 2022‐23)
SPAN 318 Islamic Spain

Two country‐specific supporting courses in the participating disciplines, each of which focuses on a
particular European country or region. Country‐specific courses need not address pan‐European
issues, but students will be expected to bring a comparative awareness of Europe to their learning
experience.
o CAMS 212 Contemporary Spanish Cinema (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ECON 221 Cambridge Program: Contemporary British Economy
o ENGL 144 Shakespeare I
o ENGL 207 Princes. Poets. Power (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 210 From Chaucer to Milton: Early English Literature (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 213 Christopher Marlowe (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 214 Revenge Tragedy
o ENGL 216 Milton
o ENGL 218 The Gothic Spirit
o ENGL 222 The Art of Jane Austen
o ENGL 244 Shakespeare I
o ENGL 249 Modern Irish Literature: Poetry, Prose, and Politics
o ENGL 256 Ireland Program: Irish History and Culture (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 274 Ireland Program: Modern Irish Literature in Ireland (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 278 London Program: Shakespeare's England (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 279 London Program: Urban Field Studies
o ENGL 281 London Program: London as City: Londinium to the Anthropocene
o ENGL 282 London Program: London Theater
o ENGL 310 Shakespeare II (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 319 The Rise of the Novel
o ENGL 323 Romanticism and Reform
o ENGL 327 Victorian Novel (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 328 Victorian Poetry (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ENGL 381 London as a City: Londinium to the Anthropocene
o EUST 207 Rome Program: Italian Encounters
o FREN 204 Intermediate French
o FREN 208 Paris Program: Contemporary France: Cultures, Politics, Society
o FREN 238 Back to the Future: French Classics Reimagined (not offered in 2022‐23)
o FREN 239 Banned Books
o FREN 241 The Lyric and Other Seductions (not offered in 2022‐23)
o FREN 244 Contemporary France and Humor (not offered in 2022‐23)
o FREN 250 French History in 10 Objects (not offered in 2022‐23)
o FREN 254 Paris Program: French Art in Context
o FREN 259 Paris Program: Hybrid Paris
o FREN 308 France and the African Imagination (not offered in 2022‐23)
o FREN 309 Expression and Translation: Encounters with Language (not offered in 2022‐23)
o FREN 340 Arts of Brevity: Short Fiction

180
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o

FREN 341 Madame Bovary and Her Avatars
FREN 353 The French Chanson (not offered in 2022‐23)
FREN 359 Paris Program: Hybrid Paris
FREN 395 The Mande of West Africa (not offered in 2022‐23)
GERM 152 Personhood (not offered in 2022‐23)
GERM 212 Contemporary Germany in Global Context (not offered in 2022‐23)
GERM 214 What’s New: The Latest Works in German‐Speaking Media
GERM 216 German Short Prose (not offered in 2022‐23)
GERM 223 Thinking Green: Sustainability, Literature, and Culture in Germany (not offered
in 2022‐23)
GERM 247 Mirror, Mirror: Reflecting on Fairy Tales and Folklore (not offered in 2022‐23)
GERM 251 Identity, Belonging, and Spaces of Home in the Works of Fatma Aydemir (not
offered in 2022‐23)
GERM 258 Berlin Program: Berlin Memory Politics
GERM 259 Berlin Program: German in Motion: Migration, Place and Displacement
GERM 267 Catastrophe! Natural Disaster in German Literature (not offered in 2022‐23)
GERM 320 Life under Socialism: Culture and Society in East Germany (not offered in 2022‐
23)
GERM 321 On the Edge: Monsters, Robots, and Cyborgs (not offered in 2022‐23)
GERM 359 Berlin Program: German in Motion: Migration, Place, and Displacement
HIST 143 Modern Italy in the Mediterranean World (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 201 Rome Program: Building Power and Piety in Medieval Italy, CE 300‐1150
HIST 206 Rome Program: The Eternal City in Time: Structure, Change, and Identity
HIST 240 Tsars and Serfs, Cossacks and Revolutionaries: The Empire that was Russia (not
offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 241 Russia through Wars and Revolutions
HIST 243 The Peasants are Revolting! Society and Politics in the Making of Modern France
(not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 245 Ireland: Land, Conflict and Memory (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 250 Modern Germany
HIST 288 Reason, Authority, and Love in Medieval France (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 289 Gender and Ethics in Late Medieval France
POSC 284 War and Peace in Northern Ireland
RUSS 205 Russian in Cultural Contexts
RUSS 226 Moscow Program: Russia's Hallowed Places (not offered in 2022‐23)
RUSS 237 Beyond Beef Stroganoff: Food in Russian Culture
RUSS 244 The Rise of the Russian Novel (not offered in 2022‐23)
RUSS 261 Lolita (not offered in 2022‐23)
RUSS 266 Dostoevsky (not offered in 2022‐23)
RUSS 267 War and Peace (not offered in 2022‐23)
RUSS 280 1917 (not offered in 2022‐23)
RUSS 331 The Wonderful World of Russian Animation
RUSS 341 From Folktale to Fanfiction: Russian Short Prose (not offered in 2022‐23)
RUSS 342 Post‐Soviet film (not offered in 2022‐23)
RUSS 345 Russian Cultural Idioms of the Nineteenth Century (not offered in 2022‐23)
RUSS 351 Chekhov (not offered in 2022‐23)
SPAN 227 Muslims, Christians, and Jews in Early Modern Spain (not offered in 2022‐23)
SPAN 229 Madrid Program: Current Issues in Spanish Politics
SPAN 244 Spain Today: Recent Changes through Narrative and Film
SPAN 301 Greek and Christian Tragedy (not offered in 2022‐23)

181
o
o
o
o
o
o

SPAN 328 The Contemporary Spanish Fictional Essay (not offered in 2022‐23)
SPAN 330 The Invention of the Modern Novel: Cervantes' Don Quijote
SPAN 345 Culture, Capitalism and the Commons
SPAN 349 Madrid Program: Theory and Practice of Urban Life
SPAN 358 The Spanish Civil War (not offered in 2022‐23)
SPAN 366 Jorge Luis Borges: Less a Man Than a Vast and Complex Literature



EUST 398: Senior Colloquium.



Minors must normally participate in an off‐campus study program in Europe.



The overall balance of courses must include a mix of disciplines and course levels (100s, 200s,
300s). While this balance will be established for each individual student in consultation with the
minor coordinator, no more than half of the required minimum of courses may be in one
department, and at least half of the required minimum of courses must be above the 100‐level.

European Studies Courses
EUST 100 Allies or Enemies? America through European Eyes During the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries, America often served as a canvass for projecting European anxieties about economic, social and
political modernization. Admiration of technological progress and political stability was combined with a
pervasive anti‐Americanism, which was, according to political scientist Andrei Markovits, the "lingua franca"
of modern Europe. These often contradictory perceptions of the United States were crucial in the process
of forming national histories and mythologies as well as a common European identity. Accordingly, this
course will explore the many and often contradictory views expressed by Europe's emerging mass publics
and intellectual and political elites about the United States during this period. 6 credits; AI, WR1, IS; Fall;
Paul Petzschmann
EUST 110 The Nation State in Europe This course explores the role of the nation and nationalism within
modern Europe and the ways in which ideas and myths about the nation have complemented and
competed with conceptions of Europe as a geographic, cultural and political unity. We will explore the
intellectual roots of nationalism in different countries as well as their artistic, literary and musical
expressions. In addition to examining nationalism from a variety of disciplinary perspectives‐‐sociology,
anthropology, history, political science‐‐we will explore some of the watershed, moments of European
nationalism such as the French Revolution, the two world wars, and the Maastricht treaty. 6 credits; HI, IS;
Not offered 2022‐23
EUST 110 The Power of Place: Memory and Counter‐Memory in the European City This team‐taught
interdisciplinary course explores the relationship between memory, place and power in Europe’s cities. It
examines the practices through which individuals and groups imagine, negotiate and contest their past in
public spaces through art, literature, film and architecture. The instructors will draw on their research and
teaching experience in urban centers of Europe after a thorough introduction to the study of memory
across different disciplines. Students will be challenged to think critically about larger questions regarding
the possibility of national and local memories as the foundation of identity and pride but also of guilt and
shame. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IS; Winter; Paul Petzschmann, Baird E Jarman, Mihaela Czobor‐Lupp
EUST 111 The Age of Cathedrals Arising over a period of two medieval centuries, the gothic cathedrals of
Europe symbolize at once faith, political and economic power, local identity, and technological and artistic
achievement. Later generations commemorated them in literature and art, destroyed them in their political
and religious zeal, and restored them (and continue to restore them) out of different sort of political zeal as

182
well as a sense of duty and opportunity to preserve a national and European cultural inheritance and tourist
treasure. In this course, we seek to understand the cathedral and its enduring legacy in Europe, and
especially in France, from a variety of interdisciplinary perspectives and using a variety of media and
sources. 6 credits; HI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
EUST 159 "The Age of Isms" ‐ Ideals, Ideas and Ideologies in Modern Europe "Ideology" is perhaps one of
the most‐used (and overused) terms of modern political life. This course will introduce students to
important political ideologies and traditions of modern Europe and their role in the development of
political systems and institutional practices from the mid‐nineteenth century to the present. We will read
central texts by conservatives, liberals, socialists, anarchists and nationalists while also considering
ideological outliers such as Fascism and Green Political Thought. In addition the course will introduce
students to the different ways in which ideas can be studied systematically and the methodologies
available. 6 credits; SI, IS; Spring; Paul Petzschmann
EUST 207 Rome Program: Italian Encounters Through a range of interdisciplinary readings, guest lectures,
and site visits, this course will provide students with opportunities to analyze important aspects of Italian
culture and society, both past and present, as well as to examine the ways in which travelers, tourists,
temporary visitors, and immigrants have experienced and coped with their Italian worlds. Topics may
include transportation, cuisine, rituals and rhythms of Italian life, urbanism, religious diversity,
immigration, tourism, historic preservation, and language. Class discussions and projects will offer students
opportunities to reflect on their own encounters with contemporary Italian culture. Prerequisite:
Participation in OCS Rome Program. 3 credits; HI, IS; Spring; William L North, Victoria Morse
EUST 249 The European Union from Constitution to Crisis It has become commonplace to say that Europe is
in crisis‐‐yet what does that mean? It is difficult to overestimate the importance of crises considering that
the European Union played a large part in overcoming Europe’s “Long Civil War” between 1914 and 1945.
The collective decision‐making processes created by European treaties are often credited with bringing
peace and prosperity to Europe. Yet they have also instituted idiosyncrasies, asymmetries and inequities
that stand in the way of solving the continent’s most pressing problems. We will examine decision‐making
processes in the European Union and the much‐debated “democratic deficit” of its institutions. These
debates about the foundations of the Union will be rounded off by an overview and brief history of
Euroscepticism. The course will include a discussion of a number of case studies that confront member
states of the European Union across the board: the reconstruction of the welfare state, immigration and
the refugee crisis, and the rise of the far right. 6 credits; SI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
EUST 278 Cross‐Cultural Psychology Sem in Prague: Politics & Culture in Central Europe‐Twentieth Century
This course covers important political, social, and cultural developments in Central Europe during the
twentieth century. Studies will explore the establishment of independent nations during the interwar
period, Nazi occupation, resistance and collaboration, the Holocaust and the expulsion of the Germans, the
nature of the communist system, its final collapse, and the post‐communist transformation. 6 credits; HI, IS;
Fall; Ken B Abrams
EUST 398 Senior Colloquium Culminates in a final oral presentation that will allow concentrators to
synthesize and reflect upon their diverse European studies, including on‐campus and off‐campus classwork,
internships, and cross‐cultural experiences. 3 credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐23

French and Francophone Studies

183

General Information
The Department of French and Francophone Studies sees language as fundamental to the study of
literatures and cultures. Committed to helping students attain proficiency in the language sequence
(FREN 101-204), the Department strives at all levels to introduce students to the rich and complex
endeavors of literary and cultural analysis. Carleton's study abroad programs in Paris and Senegal
provide opportunities for using and enhancing these skills in situ, broadening horizons while also
training students in one of the world's major languages. Our courses in literary and cultural studies
are appropriate for students wishing to do advanced work in French or who hope to use French
language and important critical skills in future careers or studies.
Language Courses
French 101, 102, 103, and 204 are a sequential series of courses designed to prepare students in the
basic language skills (listening, speaking, reading, and writing) through the study of grammar,
literature, and culture, and/or to provide the foundation for pursuing advanced work in language and
literature. French 206 is designed to develop the students' spoken and written mastery of the
language through compositions and intensive oral work based on cultural and literary topics.
Admission to these courses is determined either by appropriate high school AP or Carleton
placement test scores, or by completion of the previous course in the sequence with a grade of C- or
better.
French and Francophone Studies Courses
Most courses in the department address both literary and cultural questions, stressing a number of
goals: to refine and expand students' linguistic ability, to broaden their cultural understanding, to
improve their ability to engage in literary and cultural analysis, to enhance their knowledge of
French and Francophone history and literary criticism, and to help students better understand
themselves and the human condition. In our discussions, we address universal themes and concerns,
but we also try to uncover what is peculiarly French or Francophone about the works.

Programs Abroad Participation in a Carleton program or in another approved French language
program is highly recommended for students majoring or minoring in the above areas. The
department operates a program in Paris and non-Carleton programs are also available in France and
Francophone Africa. Students interested in study abroad should consult the section on international
off-campus programs, and discuss alternatives with faculty in French and with the Director of OffCampus Studies.
Parish International House: The French Language Associate and the French Council (composed
of students) organize numerous cultural activities at Parish House (films, political discussions, game
nights, African dinners, crêpe-making gatherings, holiday celebrations) that provide opportunities
for speaking French on campus.

184

Requirements for the French and Francophone Studies Major
The major consists of intensive work in language, literature, and culture, and it may include courses
in film or other arts. All courses in the Department of French and Francophone Studies are
conducted in French.
Sixty-nine credits beyond French 103 including:


LCST 245 (Critical Toolbox, usually taken in the junior year)
Note: HIST 298, (Junior Year History Colloquium) or ENGL 295 (Critical Methods) may be
substituted for LCST 245 with departmental approval.



Sixty credits in departmental or other electives. Students should generally begin with courses at the
200 level (FREN 204, 206, 208, 230‐259), but at least twenty‐four credits must be taken at the 300
level (400 does not count in this category). Up to twelve credits may be taken in other departments
or programs (see pre‐approved courses under the minor in French and Francophone Studies). All
courses on the Paris program may be applied to this category, as long as the requisite number of
300‐level credits is attained.



Integrative Exercise (3 credits): During their senior year, students will expand and deepen an essay
in French from one of their advanced courses in the major. Normally, but not always, the director
for this project will be the professor from that course. This essay may be completed during any
term, but must be finished by the end of winter term. In the spring term, students will deliver an
oral presentation (in English) summarizing their work. Senior students may choose one of the
following:
Option One: A substantial individual essay
Option Two: An individual essay that complements work done in a second major (subject to
approval by the Department)
Option Three: Creation of a group multidisciplinary project, subject to approval by the Department

Further details about these options are available on the Department's website.

Requirements for the French Minor
The French minor foregrounds students' proficiency and use of the French Language, since all
required courses are taught in French. In order to complete the French Minor, students must fulfill
the general requirements in the following course distribution: 36 credits completed with a grade of
C- or better in French beyond 103, including at least two upper-level literature courses (300-395).
No more than 12 credits from non-Carleton off-campus studies programs may be applied toward the
minor
Requirements for the French and Francophone Studies Minor
The French and Francophone Studies Minor unites a diversity of disciplinary approaches to France
while extending the notion of French and Francophone Studies beyond the specific territorial and
linguistic boundaries of France and Parisian French. Relying on a solid language training, courses in
Francophone literature and culture (continental Europe, Africa, the Caribbean, and North America)

185

as well as in other disciplines, this minor will afford a synthetic view of the evolution and impact of
French and Francophone cultural institutions. The majors most organically connected with this
interdisciplinary curriculum are history, anthropology, art history, political science, media studies,
and international relations, although students majoring in other disciplines may also minor in
French and Francophone Studies. No more than 12 credits from non-Carleton off-campus study
programs may be applied toward the minor


Language Requirement: French 204 or equivalent



Six Courses: Four from Group I, one from Group II, and one from Group III.
Group I: French and Francophone Literature and Culture (Four courses required, two of which
must be at the 300 level)
o FREN 206 Contemporary French and Francophone Culture
o FREN 208 Paris Program: Contemporary France: Cultures, Politics, Society
o FREN 235 The Human Body in the Francophone World (not offered in 2022‐23)
o FREN 236 Francophone Cinema and the African Experience (not offered in 2022‐23)
o FREN 238 Back to the Future: French Classics Reimagined (not offered in 2022‐23)
o FREN 239 Banned Books
o FREN 241 The Lyric and Other Seductions (not offered in 2022‐23)
o FREN 244 Contemporary France and Humor (not offered in 2022‐23)
o FREN 245 Francophone Literature of Africa and the Caribbean
o FREN 246 Contemporary Senegal (not offered in 2022‐23)
o FREN 248 Murder and Mayhem: Narratives of Suspense (not offered in 2022‐23)
o FREN 250 French History in 10 Objects (not offered in 2022‐23)
o FREN 257 French and Francophone Autofiction (not offered in 2022‐23)
o FREN 259 Paris Program: Hybrid Paris
o FREN 308 France and the African Imagination (not offered in 2022‐23)
o FREN 309 Expression and Translation: Encounters with Language (not offered in 2022‐23)
o FREN 340 Arts of Brevity: Short Fiction
o FREN 341 Madame Bovary and Her Avatars
o FREN 347 Gender and Sexuality in the Francophone World
o FREN 353 The French Chanson (not offered in 2022‐23)
o FREN 357 French and Francophone Autofiction (not offered in 2022‐23)
o FREN 359 Paris Program: Hybrid Paris
o FREN 360 The Algerian War of Liberation and Its Representations (not offered in 2022‐23)
o FREN 370 Cultural Mutations in the Francophone World: Theory and Practice (not offered
in 2022‐23)
o FREN 395 The Mande of West Africa (not offered in 2022‐23)
o LCST 245 The Critical Toolbox: Who's Afraid of Theory?

Group II History and Art History (One course required)
o
o
o
o
o
o

ARTH 140 African Art and Culture
ARTH 172 Modern Art: 1890‐1945 (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARTH 236 Baroque Art (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARTH 245 Modern Architecture (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARTH 255 Islam in the Eyes of the West (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARTH 263 European Architectural Studies Program: Prehistory to Postmodernism (not
offered in 2022‐23)

186
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o

EUST 111 The Age of Cathedrals (not offered in 2022‐23)
FREN 254 Paris Program: French Art in Context
HIST 137 Early Medieval Worlds in Transformation (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 138 Crusades, Mission, and the Expansion of Europe (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 139 Foundations of Modern Europe (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 140 The Age of Revolutions: Modern Europe, 1789‐1914 (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 141 Europe in the Twentieth Century (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 181 West Africa in the Era of the Slave Trade (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 183 History of Early West Africa (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 184 Colonial West Africa (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 232 Renaissance Worlds in France and Italy (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 243 The Peasants are Revolting! Society and Politics in the Making of Modern France
(not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 244 The Enlightenment and Its Legacies (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 288 Reason, Authority, and Love in Medieval France (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 289 Gender and Ethics in Late Medieval France

Group III: Anthropology, Political Science, Media Studies (One course required)
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o

EUST 110 The Nation State in Europe (not offered in 2022‐23)
EUST 159 "The Age of Isms" ‐ Ideals, Ideas and Ideologies in Modern Europe
FREN 255 Paris Program: Islam in France: Historical Approaches and Current Debates
POSC 251 Modern Political Philosophy: Liberalism and Its Critics
POSC 255 Post‐Modern Political Thought (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 277 Religion in Politics: Conflict or Dialogue? (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 278 Memory and Politics (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 282 Terrorism and Counterterrorism
POSC 329 Reinventing Humanism: A Dialogue with Tzvetan Todorov (not offered in 2022‐
23)
POSC 348 Strangers, Foreigners and Exiles*
POSC 352 Political Theory of Alexis de Tocqueville* (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 359 Cosmopolitanism (not offered in 2022‐23)
SOAN 108 In & Out of Africa: How Transnational Black Lives Matter (not offered in 2022‐23)
SOAN 256 Africa: Representation and Conflict

For students who wish to make the most of the French and Francophone Studies Minor, we strongly
recommend taking classes that reflect the diverse geography of the French and Francophone world.
For courses other than those in the French and Francophone Studies department, students may be
expected to do source reading in French, but papers and exams will be written in English. Check
with the department for other on- or off-campus courses that may count for the minor.

French and Francophone Studies Courses
FREN 101 Elementary French This course introduces the basic structures of the French language and
everyday vocabulary in the context of common cultural situations. Students are exposed to all four skills
(reading, writing, listening, and speaking). Taught five days a week in French. Prerequisite: None. Placement

187
score for students with previous experience in French. 6 credits; NE; Fall; Christine Lac, Stephanie M Cox,
Sandra E Rousseau
FREN 102 Elementary French Building on the material covered in French 101, this course introduces
complex sentences and additional verb tenses. Students apply the tools of narration in context through the
reading of short literary and cultural texts. The focus of the course is on all four skills (reading, writing,
listening, and speaking). Taught five days a week in French. Prerequisite: French 101 or equivalent. 6
credits; NE; Winter; Stephanie M Cox, Éva S Pósfay
FREN 103 Intermediate French This course continues the study of complex sentence structures and reviews
basic patterns in greater depth, partly through the discussion of authentic short stories and cultural topics.
Throughout the course, students practice all four skills (reading, writing, listening, and speaking). Taught
five days a week in French. Prerequisite: French 102 or equivalent. 6 credits; NE; Fall, Spring; Chérif Keïta,
Christine Lac, Sarah Anthony
FREN 204 Intermediate French Through readings, discussions, analysis of media, and other activities, this
course increases students’ skill and confidence in French. Continuing the emphasis on all modes of
communication begun in French 101‐103, French 204 focuses on Francophone cultures, contemporary
issues, and an iconic text in French. Taught three days a week in French. Prerequisite: French 103 or
equivalent. 6 credits; Fall, Winter; Chérif Keïta, Sarah Anthony
FREN 206 Contemporary French and Francophone Culture Through texts, images and films coming from
different continents, this class will present Francophone cultures and discuss the connections and tensions
that have emerged between France and other French speaking countries. Focused on oral and written
expression this class aims to strengthen students’ linguistic skills while introducing them to the academic
discipline of French and Francophone studies. The theme will be school and education in the Francophone
world. Prerequisite: French 204 or equivalent. 6 credits; LA, IS; Winter; Chérif Keïta
FREN 208 Paris Program: Contemporary France: Cultures, Politics, Society This course seeks to deepen
students' knowledge of contemporary French culture through a pluridisciplinary approach, using
multimedia (books, newspaper and magazine articles, videos, etc.) to generate discussion. It will also
promote the practice of both oral and written French through exercises, debates, and oral presentations.
Prerequisite: French 204 or equivalent. 6 credits; HI, IS; Spring; Éva S Pósfay
FREN 210 Coffee and News Keep up your French while learning about current issues in France, as well as
world issues from a French perspective. Class meets once a week for an hour. Requirements include
reading specific sections of leading French newspapers, (Le Monde, Libération, etc.) on the internet, and
then meeting once a week to exchange ideas over coffee with a small group of students. Prerequisite:
French 204 or instructor approval. 2 credits; S/CR/NC; HI, IS; Fall, Winter, Spring; Cathy Yandell
FREN 211F Songs and Stories Trailer This is a trailer course for LCST 250: "Songs and Stories: Music and/as
Language." In this two‐credit course, we'll deepen and extend discussion of the main content of the course,
with particular emphasis on French works. Participation in this trailer is required for students wishing to
count LCST 250 as a course for the French & Francophone Studies major or minors. Conducted in French.
Prerequisite: French 204. Also requires concurrent registration in Literary and Cultural Studies 250. 2
credits; S/CR/NC; NE, IS; Winter; Scott D Carpenter
FREN 235 The Human Body in the Francophone World What can a body do? How does it mean? Cultural
attitudes elicit distinct responses to this question, and French‐speaking cultures in France, North Africa, and
West Africa produce particular responses, as do gendered and differently abled bodies. At the same time,

188
isn’t every body like every other body, but different? Through literature, cultural readings, podcasts, and
film, this course will examine various aspects of the human body in francophone culture, including gender,
athletics, manual labor, artistic expression, sexuality, dance, and “personal development.” Taught in
French. Prerequisite: French 204 or the equivalent. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
FREN 236 Francophone Cinema and the African Experience Born as a response to the colonial gaze
(ethnographic films, in particular) and ideological discourse, African cinema has been a determined effort to
capture and affirm an African personality and consciousness. Focusing on film production from
Francophone Africa and its diaspora over the past few decades, this course will address themes such as
slavery, colonialism, and national identity, as well as the immigrant experience in France and in Quebec. It
will provide an introduction to African symbolisms, world‐views, and narrative techniques. Prerequisite:
French 204 or equivalent. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
FREN 238 Back to the Future: French Classics Reimagined What if Little Red Riding Hood wore a red burqa?
And if Eurydice willingly relocated to the Underworld to join her cancan‐crazed lover Pluto? In this course,
we will explore bold and inventive acts of rewriting the French classics in a wide assortment of contexts. To
do so, we will immerse ourselves in the often irreverent world of literary, musical, comic strip, and film
retellings, adaptations, sequels, and spin‐offs. Works by Perrault, Molière, Baudelaire, Offenbach, Camus,
Ben Jelloun, Daoud, Prévert, Truffaut, and more. Songs from the cabaret era to raï. Special emphasis on
developing analytical and communicative skills. Conducted in French. Prerequisite: French 204 or instructor
approval. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
FREN 239 Banned Books Recent events in France have highlighted the issues of free speech and religious
intolerance, among other cultural questions. Some of the most fascinating and now canonized works in
French and Francophone literature were once banned because they called into question the political,
religious, or moral sensibilities of the day. Even today, Francophone books deemed to be subversive are
routinely censored. Through texts, graphic novels, and films by Sade, Baudelaire, Camus, Frantz Fanon,
Pontecorvo, Julie Maroh, Hergé (Tintin), and others, we will explore the crucial role of forbidden works in
their cultural contexts. Prerequisite: French 204 or equivalent. 6 credits; LA, IS; Fall; Cathy Yandell
FREN 241 The Lyric and Other Seductions French lyric poetry occupies a privileged position in the literary
landscape of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. However, it also shares a common heritage with less
literary siblings, such as popular music and even advertising. Starting with the study of such poets as
Lamartine, Desbordes‐Valmore, Baudelaire, Mallarmé, Valéry, and Bonnefoy, we will also investigate poetic
techniques in popular songs and contemporary ads. Conducted in French. Prerequisite: French 204 or
equivalent. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
FREN 244 Contemporary France and Humor This class is an overview of France's social, cultural, and
political history from 1939 onwards. The core units of this class (WWII, decolonization, May 1968, the
Women's liberation movement, the rise of the National Front, globalization, and immigration) will be
studied through their comic representations. Sources for this class will include historical, political, literary
and journalistic texts as well as photographs, paintings, videos, blogs, and music. The contrast between
comical and non‐comical texts and objects will highlight the uses and functions of humor in communicating
about history, and illustrate the impact of comic discourses in everyday culture. In French. Prerequisite:
French 204 or equivalent. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
FREN 245 Francophone Literature of Africa and the Caribbean Reading and discussion of literary works,
with analysis of social, historical and political issues, with an emphasis on cultural and literary movements
such as Négritude (El Negrismo, in Cuba) and their role in shaping ideas of self‐determination, Nationalism

189
and Independence in the French colonies of the Caribbean and Black Africa. We will read works by Aimé
Césaire (Martinique), Léopold Sédar Senghor (Senegal), Léon Gontran Damas (French Guiana), Jacques
Roumain (Haîti), Laye Camara (Guinea), Mongo Béti (Cameroun), Simone Schwartz‐Bart (Guadeloupe) and
Alain Mabanckou (Congo). Conducted in French. Prerequisite: French 204 or the equivalent. 6 credits; LA,
IS; Spring; Chérif Keïta
FREN 246 Contemporary Senegal This course is the second part of a two‐term course sequece beginning
with French 308. This course will be a critical examination of the Francophone label within the context
of literature, education, history and daily life in Senegal. During the December break field trip, students will
visit significant cultural sites in Dakar and Saint Louis and meet with writers, artists, and other
major thought leaders. During the winter term, students will complete an independent project based on
their experience in Senegal as part of this course. Prerequisite: French 308 term before. 6 credits; NE; Not
offered 2022‐23
FREN 248 Murder and Mayhem: Narratives of Suspense Mysteries and detective novels are tied to the
French‐speaking world: Poe's foundational tales take place in Paris and are translated by Baudelaire;
murder and suspense run through the French fantastic; even Agatha Christie felt compelled to make
her favorite detective a Belgian. Through the tradition of suspense in film and literature, we'll study how
themes and techniques intersect with social anxieties to produce white‐knuckle narratives. Readings
include such authors as Poe, Baudelaire, Mérimée, Simenon, Daeninckx, Jonquet, Khadra, Vargas, Haneke.
Conducted in French. Prerequisite: French 204 or equivalent. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
FREN 250 French History in 10 Objects This class is an overview of French history through the analysis of ten
cultural objects borrowed from different socio‐political, geographic and aesthetic spaces. Starting with the
Gauls, this class will take students across centuries and ask how cultural productions (the Vix Krater, the
Versailles Palace, the guillotine, etc.) come to represent a mentalité and often become integrated in the
French nationalist project. Prerequisite: French 204. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
FREN 254 Paris Program: French Art in Context Home of some of the finest and best known museums in the
world, Paris has long been recognized as a center for artistic activity. Students will have the opportunity to
study art from various periods on site, including Impressionism, Expressionism, and Surrealism. In‐class
lectures and discussions will be complemented by guided visits to the unparalleled collections of the
Louvre, the Musée d'Orsay, the Centre Pompidou, local art galleries, and other appropriate destinations.
Special attention will be paid to the program theme. Prerequisite: French 204 or the equivalent and
Participation in OCS Paris Program. 6 credits; LA, IS; Spring; Éva S Pósfay
FREN 255 Paris Program: Islam in France: Historical Approaches and Current Debates In this course,
students will explore the historical, cultural, social, and religious traces of Islam as they have been woven
over time into the modern fabric of French society. Through images drawn from film, photography,
television, and museum displays, they will discover the important role this cultural contact zone has played
in the French experience. The course will take advantage of the resources of the city of Paris and will
include excursions to museums as well as cultural and religious centers. Prerequisite: French 204 or the
equivalent and participation in Paris OCS program. 6 credits; LA; Spring; Éva S Pósfay
FREN 257 French and Francophone Autofiction How to transcribe the self? How is a self created, examined,
or reinvented through storytelling? Is cultural context inextricable from self‐writing? Our inquiry will be
informed by readings from Montaigne, Descartes, Maryse Condé, and the controversial contemporary
author Édouard Louis; a film by Agnès Varda; an autofictional graphic novel; and songs by the Franco‐
Rwandan singer Gaël Faye. During the course of the term, students will also produce their own

190
autobiographical/autofictional projects. Offered at both the 200 and 300 levels, and coursework will be
adjusted accordingly. Prerequisite: French 204 or the equivalent. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
FREN 259 Paris Program: Hybrid Paris Through literature, cultural texts, and experiential learning in the city,
this course will explore the development of both the "Frenchness" and the hybridity that constitute
contemporary Paris. Immigrant cultures, notably North African, will also be highlighted. Plays, music, and
visits to cultural sites will complement the readings. Prerequisite: French 204 or the equivalent and
participation in OCS Paris program. 6 credits; LA, IS; Spring; Éva S Pósfay
FREN 307 The French Art of Living Well Why is “la joie de vivre” inseparable from the idea of French
culture? Recognizing that there are as many definitions of what constitutes “la joie de vivre” as there are
French speakers in the world, this course will explore and interrogate various approaches to defining‐‐and
living‐‐the good life. Philosophers, writers, podcasts, videos, and songs will inform our analyses, from
Montaigne to the present. Prerequisite: One course beyond French 204. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐
23
FREN 308 France and the African Imagination This course will look at the presence of France and its capital
Paris in the imaginary landscape of a number of prominent African writers, filmmakers and musicians such
as Bernard Dadié (Côte d' Ivoire), Ousmane Sembène (Senegal), Calixthe Beyala (Cameroun), Alain
Mabanckou (Congo‐Brazzaville), Salif Keïta (Mali) and others. The history of Franco‐African relations will be
used as a background for our analysis of these works. Conducted in French. This course is part of the OCS
winter break French Program in Senegal, involving two linked courses in fall and winter terms. This courses
is the first in the sequence, students must register for French 246 winter term. Prerequisite: One French
course beyond French 204 and acceptance in OCS Winter Break French Program in Senegal. 6 credits; LA, IS;
Not offered 2022‐23
FREN 309 Expression and Translation: Encounters with Language Learn what language can do for you when
you use techniques that express ideas with clarity, convince readers and listeners, and create a sense of
style. Beyond basic grammar, you will work on various strategies to enliven your writing and speaking and
to communicate more effectively with a given audience. Sample projects in the course may include
translations, subtitling, blogging, academic and creative writing, and formal oral presentations.
Prerequisite: One French course beyond French 204 or permission of instructor. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not
offered 2022‐23
FREN 340 Arts of Brevity: Short Fiction The rise of newspapers and magazines in the nineteenth century
promotes a variety of short genres that will remain popular to the present day: short stories, prose poetry,
vignettes, theatrical scenes. In this short course (first five weeks of the term) we'll study short works by
such authors as Diderot, Sand, Balzac, Mérimée, Flaubert, Allais, Tardieu, Le Clézio. Conducted in French.
Prerequisite: One French course beyond French 204 or instructor permission. 3 credits; LA, IS; Spring; Scott
D Carpenter
FREN 341 Madame Bovary and Her Avatars Decried as scandalous, heralded as the first "modern" novel,
Gustave Flaubert's Madame Bovary (published in 1857) sparked debate, spawned both detractors and
followers, and became a permanent fixture in French culture and even the French language. In this five‐
week course we will read the novel, study its cultural context and impact, and see how it has been variously
re‐interpreted in film and other media. Conducted in French. Prerequisite: One French course beyond
French 204 or instructor permission. 3 credits; LA, IS; Spring; Scott D Carpenter
FREN 347 Gender and Sexuality in the Francophone World From Marie/Germain Garnier, an early modern
trans figure, to the contemporary singer of Christine and the Queens (aka “Chris”), from Senghor’s “Femme

191
noire” to Sylvie Chalaye’s “Corps marron” [brown body], conceptions of gender and sexuality are essential
to the study of francophone cultures. We will explore examples of historical and contemporary
manifestations of gender and sexuality in France, francophone Africa, Lebanon, and Québec. “GPS” (Genre,
Politique, Sexualité), including the intersectional questions of race and class in context, will be analyzed
through novels, films, graphic novels, sociological studies, poetry, and music. Conducted in French.
Prerequisite: One course beyond French 204 or instructor permission. 6 credits; LA, IS; Winter; Cathy
Yandell
FREN 350 Middle East and French Connection Persepolis, Syngue Sabour, Le rocher de Tanios—three prize‐
winning texts written in French by authors whose native tongue was not French but Arabic or Farsi. In this
class we will direct our attention to the close—albeit problematic—relations between France and the
Middle East (broadly considered) through an analysis of cultural and literary objects. What has this “French
connection” meant for the Middle‐Eastern and for French culture? Prerequisite: One French course beyond
French 204 or instructor permission. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
FREN 353 The French Chanson In Beaumarchais’s oft‐cited words, “Everything ends with songs.” This course
will study the distinctiveness of French chanson (song) and its unique role in French history and culture
from Montmartre’s cafés‐concerts to the present. We will examine iconic performances in Parisian
cabarets, music halls, and nightclubs; the rise of the singer‐songwriter; the changing dynamics between
lyrics (poetry), music, and performance over time; song categories such as yé‐yé, the protest song, and the
chanson about Paris; rap and slam’s poetic affiliation with chanson; musical hybridity and identity politics;
and the clout of the music industry. No musical experience necessary. Conducted in French. Prerequisite:
One French course beyond French 204 or instructor permission. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
FREN 357 French and Francophone Autofiction How to transcribe the self? How is a self created, examined,
or reinvented through storytelling? Is cultural context inextricable from self‐writing? Our inquiry will be
informed by readings from Montaigne, Descartes, Maryse Condé, and the controversial contemporary
author Édouard Louis; a film by Agnès Varda; an autofictional graphic novel; and songs by the Franco‐
Rwandan singer Gaël Faye. During the course of the term, students will also produce their own
autobiographical/ autofictional projects. Offered at both the 200 and 300 levels, coursework will be
adjusted accordingly. Prerequisite: One French course beyond French 204 or instructor permission. 6
credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
FREN 359 Paris Program: Hybrid Paris Through literature, cultural texts, and experiential learning in the city,
this course will explore the development of both the "Frenchness" and the hybridity that constitute
contemporary Paris. Immigrant cultures, notably North African, will also be highlighted. Plays, music, and
visits to cultural sites will complement the readings. Prerequisite: French 230 or beyond and participation in
OCS Paris program. 6 credits; LA, IS; Spring; Éva S Pósfay
FREN 360 The Algerian War of Liberation and Its Representations Over fifty years after Algeria's
independence from France, discourses and representations about the cause, the violence, and the political
and social consequences of that conflict still animate public life in both France and Algeria. This class aims
at presenting the Algerian war through its various representations. Starting with discussions about the
origins of French colonialism in North Africa, it will develop into an analysis of the war of liberation and the
ways it has been recorded in history books, pop culture, and canonical texts. We will reflect on the conflict
and on its meanings in the twenty‐first century, and analyze how different media become memorial
artifacts. Prerequisite: One French course beyond French 204 or instructor permission. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not
offered 2022‐23

192
FREN 370 Cultural Mutations in the Francophone World: Theory and Practice Racisé, transclasse, personne
valide, female gaze are all concepts that have emerged recently in the Francophone world even though
they reflect experiences that have existed for a very long time. In this class we will work through such
concepts and explore how central they are to the contemporary Francophone world. Through theoretical
texts and cultural artefacts (films, songs, BD, literature) from Morocco, France, Belgium, Senegal, and other
spaces, this class seeks to develop a deeper understanding of the issues that animate the French‐speaking
world today. Prerequisite: One French course beyond French 204 or instructor permission. 6 credits; LA, IS;
Not offered 2022‐23
FREN 380 Comics: Sequence with Consequence In the Francophone world comics are known as the ninth
art, a popular, legitimate‐‐albeit contested‐‐art form. What then differentiates this art form from others?
How do comics create meaning? How do they tell stories? What stories do they tell? In this class we will
develop a multilayered approach to comics by analyzing the form and content of texts, but also by
questioning the place of comics in French, Algerian, and Québecois societies. Readings will include iconic
texts (Asterix, Tintin), alternative comics (by Fabcaro, Louerrad, Ziadé), theoretical pieces on bandes
dessinées, and conversations with working artists. Prerequisite: One French course beyond French 204 or
instructor permission. 6 credits; LA, IS; Fall; Sandra E Rousseau
FREN 395 The Mande of West Africa This course examines the main aspects of social change in the area
formerly covered by the medieval Empire of Mali, through anthropological texts, oral narratives, novels,
films and both traditional and modern music. Some of the writers, film directors and musicians who will be
studied are: Amadou Kourouma, Massa Makan Diabaté, Amadou Hampaté Bâ, Souleymane Cissé, Cheick O.
Sissoko, Salif Keita, and others. Conducted in French. Prerequisite: French 200‐level course or equivalent. 6
credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
FREN 400 Integrative Exercise During their senior year students will expand and deepen an essay in French
from one of their advanced courses in the major. The director for this project will usually be the professor
from that course. This essay may be completed during any term, but must be finished by the end of winter
term. In the spring term, students will deliver an oral presentation (in English) of their work. Senior students
may choose one of the following: Option One: A substantial individual essay. Option Two: A individual essay
that complements work done in a second major (subject to approval by the Department). Option Three:
Creation of a group multidisciplinary project (such as those organized by Global Engagement), subject to
approval by the Department. Further details about these options are available on the Department's
website. 3 credits; S/NC; Fall

Gender, Women's & Sexuality Studies
Gender, Women's & Sexuality Studies Major
GWSS 110, Introduction to Gender, Women's & Sexuality Studies, is the gateway to the major that
provides an overview of the field of gender, women’s and sexuality studies. GWSS 200, Gender,
Power and the Pursuit of Knowledge, examines feminist and queer theories of knowledge and
provides methodological tools to conduct research. GWSS 212, Foundations of LGBTQ Studies is
an intermediate level course that provides an interdisciplinary examination of sexual desires, sexual
orientations, and the concept of sexuality generally, with a particular focus on the construction of
lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender identities. GWSS 334, Feminist Theory, and GWSS 312,
Queer and Trans Theory, are upper level seminars focusing on the theory necessary for advanced
work on gender, women’s and sexuality studies. The capstone course, GWSS 398, which varies

193

each year, offers students the opportunity to study a topic in depth and to produce a substantial
research paper. Topics will rotate and change depending on the expertise and interest of the faculty
teaching them. The major culminates in a senior comprehensive project, directed by advisers from
two different disciplines, that builds on the skills and interests developed in previous coursework in
GWSS. Each student devises an appropriate program of courses in consultation with the major
adviser (i.e. the director of GWSS).
Requirements for the Gender, Women's & Sexuality Studies Major
The GWSS major is a total of 66 credits. It requires:










One gateway course
o GWSS 110 Introduction to Gender, Women's & Sexuality Studies
One methodology course
o GWSS 200 Gender, Sexuality & the Pursuit of Knowledge
One intermediate course
o GWSS 212 Foundations of LGBTQ Studies
One theory seminar
o GWSS 312 Queer and Trans Theory
o GWSS 334 Feminist Theory (not offered in 2022‐23)
One Capstone Seminar
o GWSS 398 Capstone: Race, Gender, and Sexuality in Popular Culture
o GWSS 398 Capstone: Transnational Feminist Activism (not offered in 2022‐23)
o GWSS 398 Capstone: Schooling Sex: History of Sex Education & Instruction (not offered in
2022‐23)
Comprehensive Exercise, GWSS 400
In addition to the five required courses and comps listed above (36 credits), students must
complete an additional five electives (30 credits) from the GWSS Elective/Additional Courses List
below. These 30 credits must be spread across at least two disciplines and include:

o
o

One 300‐level elective and
Four any‐level* electives (*Max two 100‐level elective courses can count toward the
major)

Please note: a variety of courses are taught by visitors or offered only occasionally. These courses
may still be considered. Contact the director for consideration of other courses to satisfy this
requirement.
Students will plan courses in consultation with the Program Director or a designated faculty adviser
when they declare their major, and review their plan each term. The major they design should
provide both breadth of exposure to Gender, Women's & Sexuality Studies across fields and depth
of study in one discipline (normally at least two courses in one area or from one department).
OCS Programs: You may count up to two 6 credit courses taken on either Carleton or nonCarleton OCS programs toward the requirements of the GWSS major or minor. OCS program
courses cannot be substituted for core GWSS courses on campus and will only count towards
GWSS electives. Two courses from Carleton's Women's & Gender Studies in Europe program can
count as two GWSS elective courses. Students will need to get all OCS program courses approved
by the director of GWSS.

194

Gender, Women's & Sexuality Studies Minor
The Gender, Women's & Sexuality Studies minor offers students the opportunity to complement
their major field with an interdisciplinary focus on gender, women's and sexuality studies.
Requirements for the Gender, Women's & Sexuality Studies Minor
THE GWSS minor is a total of 36 credits. It requires:






One gateway course
o GWSS 110 Introduction to Gender, Women's & Sexuality Studies
One intermediate course
o GWSS 212 Foundations of LGBTQ Studies
One capstone seminar
o GWSS 398 Capstone: Race, Gender, and Sexuality in Popular Culture
o GWSS 398 Capstone: Transnational Feminist Activism (not offered in 2022‐23)
o GWSS 398 Capstone: Schooling Sex: History of Sex Education & Instruction (not offered in
2022‐23)
In addition to the three required courses listed above (18 credits), students must completed an
additional three elective courses (18 credits) from the GWSS Elective/Additional Courses List. These
18 credits must be spread across two different disciplines.

Please note: A variety of courses are by visitors or offered only occasionally and may be
considered. Contact the director for consideration of other courses to satisfy this requirement.
OCS Programs: You may count up to two 6 credit courses taken on either Carleton or nonCarleton OCS programs toward the requirements of the GWSS major or minor. OCS program
courses cannot be substituted for core GWSS courses on campus and will only count towards
GWSS electives. Two courses from Carleton's Women's & Gender Studies in Europe program can
count as two GWSS elective courses. Students will need to get all OCS program courses approved
by the director of GWSS.
GWSS Elective/Additional Courses List















AMST 225 Beauty and Race in America (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARTH 214 Queer Art (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARTH 220 The Origins of Manga: Japanese Prints
BIOL 101 Human Reproduction and Sexuality
CAMS 225 Film Noir: The Dark Side of the American Dream
CLAS 214 Gender and Sexuality in Classical Antiquity (not offered in 2022‐23)
DANC 266 Reading The Dancing Body (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 217 A Novel Education (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 227 Imagining the Borderlands
ENGL 319 The Rise of the Novel
ENGL 327 Victorian Novel (not offered in 2022‐23)
FREN 235 The Human Body in the Francophone World (not offered in 2022‐23)
FREN 241 The Lyric and Other Seductions (not offered in 2022‐23)
FREN 347 Gender and Sexuality in the Francophone World

195













































GERM 221 (re/ex)press yourself: Sexuality and Gender in Fin‐de‐Siècle Literature and Art (not
offered in 2022‐23)
GWSS 110 Introduction to Gender, Women's & Sexuality Studies
GWSS 150 Working Sex: Commercial Sexual Cultures (not offered in 2022‐23)
GWSS 212 Foundations of LGBTQ Studies
GWSS 243 Women's and Gender Studies in Europe Program: Situated Feminisms: Socio‐Political
Systems and Gender Issues Across Europe
GWSS 244 Women's & Gender Studies in Europe Program: Cross‐Cultural Feminist Methodologies
GWSS 265 Black Feminist Thought (not offered in 2022‐23)
GWSS 289 Pleasure, Intimacy, Violence (not offered in 2022‐23)
GWSS 325 Women's & Gender Studies in Europe Program: Continental Feminist, Queer, Trans*
Theories
GWSS 398 Capstone: Race, Gender, and Sexuality in Popular Culture
GWSS 398 Capstone: Transnational Feminist Activism (not offered in 2022‐23)
GWSS 398 Capstone: Schooling Sex: History of Sex Education & Instruction (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 122 U.S. Women's History to 1877 (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 123 U.S. Women's History Since 1877 (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 211 Revolts and Resistance in Early America (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 218 Black Women's History (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 229 Working with Gender in U.S. History
HIST 270 Nuclear Nations: India and Pakistan as Rival Siblings
IDSC 203 Talking about Diversity (not offered in 2022‐23)
PHIL 257 Contemporary Issues in Feminist Philosophy
POSC 276 Imagination in Politics: Resisting Totalitarianism
POSC 308 Global Gender Politics*
POSC 324 Rebels and Risk Takers: Women and War in the Middle East* (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 339 LGBTQ Politics in America (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 161 The Jewish Bible (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 218 The Body in Judaism, Christianity, and Islam (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 221 Judaism and Gender (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 227 Liberation Theologies (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 232 Queer Religions (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 233 Gender and Power in the Catholic Church
RELG 234 Angels, Demons, and Evil
RELG 280 The Politics of Sex in Asian Religion (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 287 Many Marys (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 362 Spirit Possession (not offered in 2022‐23)
SOAN 114 Modern Families: An Introduction to the Sociology of the Family (not offered in 2022‐23)
SOAN 225 Social Movements (not offered in 2022‐23)
SOAN 226 Anthropology of Gender (not offered in 2022‐23)
SOAN 257 Culture and Politics in India (not offered in 2022‐23)
SOAN 323 Mother Earth: Women, Development and the Environment (not offered in 2022‐23)
SOAN 325 Sociology of Adoption and Assisted Reproduction (not offered in 2022‐23)
SOAN 395 Ethnography of Reproduction (not offered in 2022‐23)
SPAN 244 Spain Today: Recent Changes through Narrative and Film
THEA 260 Space, Time, Body, Minds (not offered in 2022‐23)
THEA 270 Art and (Un)Freedom (not offered in 2022‐23)

196

Gender, Women's & Sexuality Studies Courses
GWSS 110 Introduction to Gender, Women's & Sexuality Studies This course is an introduction to the ways
in which gender and sexuality structure our world, and to the ways feminists challenge established
intellectual frameworks. However, since gender and sexuality are not homogeneous categories, but are
crosscut by class, race, ethnicity, citizenship and culture, we also consider the ways differences in social
location intersect with gender and sexuality. 6 credits; SI; Fall, Winter; Iveta Jusová
GWSS 150 Working Sex: Commercial Sexual Cultures Why is the sale of sex criminalized? Who participates
in sexual labor and for what reasons? What are the goals and tactics of sex worker social
movements? Sexual commerce is an integral facet of U.S. society and the global economy, and yet it elicits
strong and paradoxical reactions. This course provides an interdisciplinary introduction to the study of
commercial sexual cultures. Taking a transnational approach, we will examine historical, political, and
economic changes in sexual economies and the regulation of commercial sex. Course readings explore how
sex workers have collectively organized to resist criminalization and fight for a better future. 6 credits; HI,
IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
GWSS 200 Gender, Sexuality & the Pursuit of Knowledge In this course we will examine whether there are
feminist and/or queer ways of knowing, the criteria by which knowledge is classified as feminist and the
various methods used by feminist and queer scholars to produce this knowledge. Some questions that will
occupy us are: How do we know what we know? Who does research? Does it matter who the researcher is?
How does the social location (race, class, gender, sexuality) of the researcher affect research? Who is the
research for? What is the relationship between knowledge, power and social justice? While answering
these questions, we will consider how different feminist and queer studies researchers have dealt with
them. 6 credits; SI, WR2, IS; Spring; Meera Sehgal
GWSS 212 Foundations of LGBTQ Studies This course introduces students to foundational interdisciplinary
works in sexuality and gender studies, while focusing on the construction of lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender, and queer identities in the United States. In exploring sexual and gender diversity throughout
the term, this seminar highlights the complexity and variability of experiences of desire, identification,
embodiment, self‐definition, and community‐building across different historical periods, and in relation to
intersections of race, class, ethnicity, and other identities. 6 credits; HI, IDS; Fall; Candace I Moore
GWSS 243 Women's and Gender Studies in Europe Program: Situated Feminisms: Socio‐Political Systems
and Gender Issues Across Europe This course examines the history and present of feminist and LGBTQ
activisms across Western and East‐Central Europe. We study the impact of the European colonial heritage
on the lives of women and sexual/ethnic minorities across European communities, as well as the legacies of
World War II, the Cold War, and the EU expansion into Eastern Europe. Reproductive rights, LGBTQ issues,
“anti‐genderism,” sex work, trafficking, and issues faced by ethnic minorities are among topics explored.
These topics are addressed comparatively and historically, stressing their ‘situated’ nature and considering
their divergent sociopolitical national frameworks. Prerequisite: Acceptance into the WGST Europe OCS
Program required. 7‐8 credits; HI, IS; Fall; Iveta Jusová
GWSS 244 Women's & Gender Studies in Europe Program: Cross‐Cultural Feminist Methodologies This
course explores the following questions: What is the relationship between methodology and knowledge
claims in feminist research? How do language and narrative help shape experience? What are the power
interests involved in keeping certain knowledges marginalized/subjugated? How do questions of gender
and sexuality, of ethnicity and national location, figure in these debates? We will also pay close attention to
questions arising from the hegemony of English as the global language of WGS as a discipline, and will
reflect on what it means to move between different linguistic communities, with each being differently

197
situated in the global power hierarchies. Prerequisite: Acceptance into the WGST Europe OCS Program
required. 7‐8 credits; HI, IS; Fall; Iveta Jusová
GWSS 250 Politics of Reproductive Justice Feminist mobilization around reproductive rights in the US has
changed in its focus and intensity over the past 50 years. Black American and other transnational feminists
have argued about the necessity of distinguishing between reproductive rights and reproductive justice.
How has this argument impacted the ideology and collective‐change strategies of different feminist
communities mobilizing for reproductive rights? What collective‐change strategies have they proposed and
what obstacles have they faced? This course has a major civic engagement component that requires
students to work with feminist non‐profit organizations in and around Northfield or in the greater Twin
Cities area. 6 credits; SI, IDS; Fall; Meera Sehgal
GWSS 265 Black Feminist Thought This course is designed to introduce students to thirty years of black
feminist politics, writing, social and cultural analysis, and research. This course begins with a sketch of
contemporary thinking about blackness by noted scholars who illuminate the relationship between
blackness, black life, systems of sex/gender, biopolitics, and black/queer feminist knowledge production.
We go on to historicize the formation of black feminism as a dynamic and fluid area of study within and
across the humanities and social sciences. The history of black feminist thought presented in black women’s
studies as an inherently decolonial and transformative praxis that centers intellectual radicalism both inside
and outside of the academy. 6 credits; HI, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
GWSS 289 Pleasure, Intimacy, Violence This is an interdisciplinary course that explores how pleasure,
intimacy, and violence are shaped by historic and ongoing processes of inequality in the United States. We
will explore how our understandings of sexuality are influenced by discourses and practices of race and
race‐making in the U.S. by focusing on the relationship between micro‐level (interpersonal) and macro‐level
(societal) violence. The topics of rape, family violence, and intimate partner violence will be examined from
a structural vantage point, emphasizing the mutually constituting roles of gender, race, class, and
nationality. The concepts of “pleasure” and “enjoyment” are foregrounded throughout the course. 6
credits; HI, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
GWSS 312 Queer and Trans Theory This seminar offers students familiar with the foundational terms and
concepts in gender and sexuality studies the opportunity to engage in more advanced explorations of
relevant topics and debates in contemporary queer and trans theory. Seeing queer theory and trans theory
as theoretical traditions that are historically and philosophically entangled but which at times necessarily
diverge, the course focuses on “state of the field” essays from Gay and Lesbian Quarterly and Transgender
Studies Quarterly as well as works that put gender and sexuality studies into conversation with disability
studies, critical race theory, indigenous studies, and critiques of neoliberalism and imperialism.
Prerequisite: Gender, Women's & Sexuality Studies 110, 212 , 334 or Women's & Gender Studies 110, 112
or 200 or instructor consent. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IDS; Spring; Candace I Moore
GWSS 325 Women's & Gender Studies in Europe Program: Continental Feminist, Queer, Trans* Theories
Addressing the impact of Anglo‐American influences in Women’s, Gender and Sexuality Studies, this course
examines European, including East‐Central European, approaches to key gender and sexuality topics. It
raises questions about the transfer of feminist concepts across cultures and languages. Some of the themes
explored include nationalism and gender/sexuality, gendered dimensions of Western and East‐Central
European racisms, the historical influence of psychoanalysis on Continental feminist theories, the
implications of European feminisms in the history of colonialism, the biopolitics of gender,
homonationalism, as well as Eastern European socialist/communist theories of women’s emancipation.
Prerequisite: Acceptance to WGST Europe OCS Program. 7‐8 credits; HI, IS; Fall; Iveta Jusová

198
GWSS 334 Feminist Theory This seminar explores key feminist theoretical perspectives and debates, using a
historical framework to situate these ideas in relationship to philosophical and political discourses
produced during specific cultural moments. Focusing primarily on American feminist thought, this seminar
ultimately aims to interrogate the positionality of the theorists we study, considering the cultural privileges
as well as vectors of marginalization that influence those viewpoints. We follow feminist thinkers as they
propose, challenge, critique, subvert, and revise theoretical traditions of liberalism, Marxism, Socialism,
radicalism, separatism, utopianism, multiculturalism, postmodernism, queerness, and post‐colonialism. We
ask: What gets counted as feminist theory? What gets left out? 6 credits; HI, WR2, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
GWSS 391 Women's & Gender Studies in Europe Program: Independent Field Research in Europe This is a
self‐designed project, and the topic will be determined by each student’s research interests. It will build on
readings and work by European women and/or sexual minorities, feminist and queer theory, cross‐cultural
theory and (if applicable) principles of field research. It should be cross‐cultural and comparative, and
ideally should involve field work. Drawing on skills developed in feminist theory and methodology seminars,
students select appropriate research methods and conduct sustained research in two of the countries
visited. The progress of each project will be evaluated regularly in relation to parameters established in
conjunction with the Program Director. Prerequisite: Acceptance into the WGST Europe OCS Program
required. 7‐8 credits; NE; Fall; Iveta Jusová
GWSS 398 Capstone: Race, Gender, and Sexuality in Popular Culture This capstone seminar reads
representations of racial, gender, and sexual minorities in popular culture through the lenses of feminist,
critical race, queer, and trans theories. Kimberlé Crenshaw coined the term “intersectionality” in the late
1980s to describe an approach to oppression that considered how structures of power act multiply on
individuals based upon their interlocking racial, class, gender, sexual, and other identities. This seminar
takes up the charge of intersectional analysis—rejecting essentialist theories of difference while exploring
pluralities—to interpret diversity (or lack thereof) in forms of art and entertainment, focusing on film, TV,
and digital media. Prerequisite: Gender, Women's & Sexuality Studies 110 or 212 or Cinema and Media
Studies 110 or Women's and Gender Studies 110 or 112 or instructor consent. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IDS;
Winter; Candace I Moore
GWSS 398 Capstone: Schooling Sex: History of Sex Education & Instruction How did sex get into public
schools? How did sexual practice and desire become an object of scientific inquiry? Why has sex education
been a site for repeated social conflicts, and what do those conflicts tell us about gender, racial, and
economic inequality in the United States? This course is for everyone who has ever questioned the official
and unofficial curriculum of sex education. The course provides a cultural and intellectual history of sex
education and instruction within the geographic region of the United States. Throughout we will examine
the complex relationship between sexual knowledge, pedagogy, and systems of power. 6 credits; HI, WR2,
IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
GWSS 398 Capstone: Transnational Feminist Activism This course focuses on transnational feminist activism
in an era of globalization, militarism and religious fundamentalism. We will learn about the debates around
different theories of social change, the challenges and pitfalls of global sisterhood and the various
"pedagogies of crossing" borders. We will explore case studies of how feminists have collaborated, built
networks, mobilized resources and coalitions for collective action, in addition to the obstacles and
constraints they have encountered and surmounted in their search for gender and sexual justice. 6 credits;
SI, WR2, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
GWSS 400 Integrative Exercise 1‐6 credit; NE; Fall; Meera Sehgal, Candace I Moore

199

Geology
Students who discover in themselves a sense of excitement about the environment, mountains,
climate change, volcanoes, fossils, rivers and earthquakes, will find a good home in the Carleton
Geology Department. Founded by Dr. Laurence M. Gould, former President of the College and one
of the first geologists to explore Antarctica, the geology department retains a spirit of exploration
and adventure. Fieldwork in the out of doors is central to our curriculum. The interests and goals of
geology students are diverse; more than three-fourths go to graduate school as preparation for
careers in academia, environmental sciences, science journalism, industry, and the public sector at
the local through federal levels. A degree in Geology has also proved to be a good foundation for
graduate study and work in conservation, architecture, engineering, resource economics,
environmental education, and resource management. Typical of Carleton, our graduates can also be
found in almost any profession.
The geology curriculum is flexible, rigorous, and rooted in the traditions of a liberal arts education.
Junior and senior majors in other natural sciences and Environmental Studies are welcome to enroll
in geology courses numbered 200 and above without the introductory geology prerequisite with
permission of the instructor. Students may receive credit for only one 100-level geology course.
Requirements for the Geology Major









Any introductory geology (100 level) course that includes a laboratory section (the requirement for
introductory geology may be waived for juniors who come to geology from another science major).
36 credits from the 200‐ and 300‐level Geology course offerings. (42 credits if the introductory
geology requirement was not completed). Six credits toward the major can be counted from any
single off‐campus program where appropriate, with a maximum of twelve credits toward the major
from all off‐campus programs. Geology students should take three or four 200‐level courses before
taking 300‐level courses.
Six credits of Geology 400, Integrative Exercise and attend seminars associated with comps fall,
winter and spring terms senior year (students planning to spend a term off‐campus during senior
year should attend the appropriate seminars during junior year).
Six credits of Physics from courses numbered 131 and above;
Six credits of Chemistry from courses numbered 123 and above;
Twelve credits of Mathematics from courses numbered 111 (101) and above; Computer Science
courses numbered 111 and above may count for six credits of the mathematics requirement.

Geology majors are encouraged to participate in a recognized field camp and take part in summer
research opportunities.
These requirements for the geology major are considered to be minimal; students planning a career
in geosciences should take several additional courses in mathematics and other sciences as well as
geology.
Students interested in earth science education should discuss their plans with the Educational
Studies department because a number of specific courses must be taken for teacher certification.
Note: Students may receive credit for only one 100-level geology course.

200

Geology Courses
GEOL 110 Introduction to Geology and Lab An introduction to the fundamental and wondrous processes
that shape the Earth. We approach learning through outdoor and laboratory problems, which are often
complicated and messy, like the planet itself. Topics may include the formation of rocks, minerals, and
mountains, the water cycle, plate tectonics, climate change, volcanoes, and earthquakes. One all‐day
weekend field trip is typically required. No previous outdoor experience or gear is needed. Prerequisite: Not
open to students who have taken another 100‐level Geology course. 6 credits; LS; Fall, Spring; Bereket
Haileab, Cameron Davidson, Dan P Maxbauer
GEOL 115 Climate Change in Geology and Lab This course is designed to introduce the study of
paleoclimatology broadly, and is based on investigating local deposits that span a broad range of geologic
time. We will perform research projects on topics of local interest, which may include: analyzing fossils in
450 million year old rock, scrutinizing reported Cretaceous dinosaur gizzard‐stones, researching post‐Ice
Age climate change using cave or lake deposits, and using dendrochronology (tree rings) and seismic
surveys to study disruption of the prairie‐big woods landscape by European settlers. Participants should be
prepared for outdoor laboratories and one Saturday field trip. Prerequisite: Not open to students who have
taken another Geology 100‐level course. 6 credits; LS, QRE; Not offered 2022‐23
GEOL 120 Introduction to Environmental Geology & Lab An introduction to geology emphasizing the
physical basis of systems of interest to environmentalists, ecologists, and policy makers. Field trips and
laboratories included. Prerequisite: Not open to students who have taken another Geology 100‐level
course. 6 credits; LS, QRE, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
GEOL 125 Introduction to Field Geology and Lab This course introduces fundamental principles of geology
and geological reasoning using the geology of southern Minnesota as a guide. Weather permitting, much of
the classroom and lab time will be spent outdoors at nearby sites of geological interest. Using field
observations, descriptions, data‐gathering and interpretation, supplemented by lab work and critical
reading, students will piece together the most important elements of the long and complex geologic history
of southern Minnesota. Field trips, including one or two all‐day weekend trips, and laboratories included.
Prerequisite: Not open to students who have taken another 100‐level Geology course. 6 credits; LS, QRE;
Fall; Clint A Cowan
GEOL 130 Geology of National Parks This course introduces fundamental principles of geology and geologic
reasoning with natural examples from the National Park system. Topics may range from volcanic hazards of
Yellowstone to the geologic history recorded in the walls of the Grand Canyon to the effects of climate
change on the Everglades. A multiday field trip over mid‐term break is required; no camping experience or
equipment is required but students should be prepared to spend time outdoors. The field trip may include
some strenuous hiking. Prerequisite: Not open to students who have taken another 100‐level Geology
course. 6 credits; LS; Winter; Chloé Fandel
GEOL 135 Introduction to Climate Science This course aims to provide a survey of topics relevant to
understanding Earth’s climate past, present, and future. Topics of interest will include the Earth’s climate
system, rates and magnitude of change, methods for reconstructing and understanding Earth’s climate
history, and researching local climate archives including cave deposits, tree rings, lake sediments, and soils.
Outdoor laboratories included. 6 credits; LS, QRE; Not offered 2022‐23
GEOL 200 Selected Field Topics in Geology This seminar course will investigate a variety of topics relevant
to a specific field site. Participants will conduct fieldwork, which may involve recording observations,
documenting field relationships, collecting samples, analyzing and taking in situ measurements, and

201
collecting material for laboratory analysis. Coursework will also include group and independent study into
the underlying geology of the region, as well as use of the primary literature to research topics of specific
interest. Prerequisite: Instructor's Permission required. Students should waitlist. 2 credits; Not offered
2022‐23
GEOL 205 Selected Topics in Geology This seminar course will focus on a specific topic in the Earth Sciences.
Coursework will include group and independent study, as well as use of the primary literature to research
topics of specific interest. Some sections of this course may involve laboratory or field work. Prerequisite:
Instructor Consent. 3 credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐23
GEOL 210 Geomorphology and Lab A lab and field‐focused introduction to water resources – the processes
driving the water cycle, the methods used to quantify and understand the flow of water, and the
relationship between humans and water. Weekly field trips to nearby locations such as streams, wellfields,
caves, and water infrastructure to develop skills including streamflow measurements, water quality
monitoring, pump tests, and measuring soil properties. No previous outdoor experience required.
Prerequisite: 100 level Geology course or instructor permission. 6 credits; LS, QRE; Fall; Chloé Fandel
GEOL 220 Tectonics and Lab This course focuses on understanding the plate tectonics paradigm and its
application to all types of plate boundaries. We will explore the historical development of the paradigm,
geophysical tools used for imaging the structure of the Earth and determining plate motions, and possible
driving mechanisms of this global system. Students will independently explore a particular tectonic plate in
detail throughout the term. Laboratories included. Prerequisite: One introductory (100‐level) Geology
course. 6 credits; LS, WR2; Fall; Sarah J Titus
GEOL 230 Paleobiology and Lab Fossils: their anatomy and classification, evolution, and ecology. Special
emphasis on the paleobiology of marine invertebrates. Field trips and laboratories included. Prerequisite:
100‐level Geology course or an introductory Biology course, or instructor permission. 6 credits; LS, WR2;
Spring; Clint A Cowan
GEOL 240 Geophysics and Lab This applied geophysics course focuses on understanding the near‐surface
structure of the Earth using a hand‐on approach. Students will collect, process, model, and interpret
geophysical data using gravitational, magnetic, and seismic methods. Weekly laboratories and one
weekend field trip will be required. Prerequisite: One introductory 100‐level Geology course and one
Physics introductory course or instructor consent. 6 credits; LS, QRE; Not offered 2022‐23
GEOL 245 “When the Earth Shook…” Earthquakes in Human History and Lab Earthquakes (and associated
tsunamis) are complex, fascinating geological events, and they often have profound and devastating effects
on human societies. In this course, we will explore the changing human understandings of earthquakes and
their geological mechanisms from antiquity to the present; the development of techniques for
understanding them; and the ways in which societies prepare for and respond to life in seismically active
zones of the world. Case studies will form an important element of the course and students will pursue
research using scientific and humanistic sources to understand earthquakes in all their dimensions. There is
a required lab. Prerequisite: 100 level Geology course or prior History course. 6 credits; LS, QRE, IS, WR2;
Not offered 2022‐23
GEOL 250 Mineralogy and Lab The study of the chemical and physical properties of minerals, their geologic
occurrence and associations. Topics include crystallography, crystal chemistry, x‐ray analysis, phase
equilibria, classification, optical mineralogy, and environments of formation. Laboratories are included.
Prerequisite: One introductory (100‐level) Geology course, or Chemistry 123 or 128. 6 credits; LS; Winter;
Bereket Haileab

202
GEOL 255 Petrology and Lab An introduction to the fundamental physical, chemical and tectonic principles
that are relevant to the formation of igneous and metamorphic rocks. Labs emphasize description and
interpretation of the origin of rocks based on hand specimen and thin section study. Field trips and
laboratories are included. Prerequisite: Geology 250. 6 credits; LS; Spring; Bereket Haileab
GEOL 258 Geology of Soils and Lab The study of soil formation, and physical and chemical properties of soils
especially as related to geomorphology and land use. Laboratories and field trips will emphasize how to
describe and interpret soils. Prerequisite: One introductory (100‐level) geology course. 6 credits; LS, WR2;
Not offered 2022‐23
GEOL 260 Coastal Marine Ecology Modern (and ancient) coastal marine benthic communities and their
ecology. Topics include: structure of coastal communities, organisms' interactions with each other and their
environment, inshore physical oceanography, intertidal rocky shorelines, kelp forests, mangrove and coral
reefs. Readings focus on landmark papers in nearshore marine ecology. Students explore research topics
related to modern or ancient crises in marine ecosystems. Some years, an optional, multiday field trip over
mid‐term break may be provided; no experience or equipment is required, but participants must be
prepared to spend time in the water and be competent swimmers. Prerequisite: One 200‐level course from
either Geology or Biology or permission of the instructor. 6 credits; LS, WR2; Winter; Clint A Cowan
GEOL 285 Geology in New Zealand: North Island In this course, participants will study modern and ancient
geologic systems in the North Island with a view to understanding the tectonic, volcanic, and sedimentary
history of New Zealand. The course will include projects in a wide range of geological settings. Prerequisite:
Enrollment in OCS Program. 6 credits; NE; Winter; Sarah J Titus, Cameron Davidson
GEOL 286 Geology in New Zealand: Topics in North Island Geology This course is tied to the North Island
half of the program. Readings and discussions will cover a broad range of topics appropriate to North Island
geology. Prerequisite: Enrollment in OCS program. 2 credits; S/CR/NC; NE; Winter; Sarah J Titus, Cameron
Davidson
GEOL 287 Geology in New Zealand: South Island In this course, students will study the tectonic evolution of
the South Island. Participants will work in small teams to hone their field observation skills, make structural
measurements, and develop their mapping skills in several field sites across the South Island. Visits to
additional field sites such as glaciers, fjords, and the Alpine fault are possible. Prerequisite: Enrollment in
OCS program. 6 credits; NE; Winter; Cameron Davidson, Sarah J Titus
GEOL 288 Geology in New Zealand: Topics in South Island Geology This course is tied to the South Island
half of the program. Readings and discussions will cover a broad range of topics appropriate to South Island
geology. Prerequisite: Enrollment in OCS program. 2 credits; S/CR/NC; NE; Winter; Cameron Davidson,
Sarah J Titus
GEOL 289 Geology in New Zealand: Basic Field Drawing Formal and informal instruction and opportunity to
improve field drawing skills. This course will include an independent field drawing assignment during
midterm break in New Zealand. Prerequisite: Enrollment in OCS program. 2 credits; S/CR/NC; NE; Winter;
Sarah J Titus, Cameron Davidson
GEOL 315 Paleoclimate The main objective of paleoclimatology is to reconstruct past climates in order to
improve our understanding of the processes involved in controlling Earth’s climate at various timescales.
This course will focus on climate reconstructions from local climate archives. Lab and some class time will
be dedicated to group research projects. Reading and discussing primary literature is expected along with
presentations and writing assignments related to research topics. Laboratories and one weekend field trip

203
included. Prerequisite: Two 200 level geology courses, or instructor consent. 6 credits; LS, QRE; Not offered
2022‐23
GEOL 340 Hydrogeology: Groundwater The principles of groundwater flow through the subsurface, and the
functioning of aquifers. Topics include the properties of porous media, hydraulic head gradients,
contaminant transport, and fractured and karstified aquifers. Labs will include working with physical
sandbox models and soil columns, as well as an outdoor pumping well test (weather permitting). We will
simulate groundwater flow using simple numerical modeling, beginning with an introduction to Python
coding, and develop an increasingly complex groundwater model over the course of the term. No previous
programming experience required. Prerequisite: Geology 210 recommended. 6 credits; LS, QRE; Spring;
Chloé Fandel
GEOL 360 Sedimentology and Stratigraphy and Lab This course is based on field examination of outcrops of
Lower Paleozoic sedimentary rock. We will interpret the processes involved in the creation, movement, and
deposition of these ancient sediments, and try to determine their paleoenvironments. Also of interest are
the transformation of these sediments into rock and the analysis and correlation of strata. Weekly
laboratories, one overnight trip, and one Saturday trip are required. Please note the late laboratory times.
Both paleobiology and geomorphology prepare students for work in sedimentology. This course is intended
for upperclass Geology majors, and much of the work is done in teams. Prerequisite: Three 200‐level
Geology courses. 6 credits; LS, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
GEOL 365 Structural Geology and Lab This course focuses on rock deformation at scales ranging from the
collision of continents to the movement of individual atoms within crystals. We will examine structures that
develop within different layers of the Earth's lithosphere and discuss how and why these structures form.
Reading, discussion, and presentation of scientific literature is expected throughout the term as we focus
on deformation and tectonics in a single region. Laboratories and one weekend field trip are included.
Prerequisite: Two 200‐level Geology courses or instructor consent. 6 credits; LS; Not offered 2022‐23
GEOL 370 Geochemistry of Natural Waters The main goal of this course is to introduce and tie together the
several diverse disciplines that must be brought to bear on hydrogeochemical problems today. This course
will explore: principles of geochemistry, applications of chemical thermodynamics to geologic problems,
mineral solubility, stability diagrams, chemical aspects of sedimentary rocks, geochemical tracers,
radiogenic isotopes and principles of stable isotope fractionation. Laboratories included. Prerequisite:
Chemistry 123 or permission of the instructor. 6 credits; LS, WR2, QRE; Not offered 2022‐23
GEOL 400 Integrative Exercise Each senior geology major must take a total of six credits of Geology 400.
One of the credits will be awarded in the spring term for the preparation and delivery of a formal talk and
attendance at the talks or other seniors. The other five credits must be taken in the fall and/or winter
terms. Credits can be divided between those two terms or all five credits may be taken in the same term.
All seniors must attend the Geology 400 seminars which will meet weekly fall and winter term. Geology 400
is a continuing course, and the grade will not be awarded until the end of spring term. 1‐6 credit; S/NC; Fall,
Winter, Spring

German
German is spoken by more than 200 million people worldwide. At Carleton we strive to create a
welcoming and inclusive learning environment that allows students to experience the richness of the
German-speaking world.

204

After three terms of German at Carleton, students have the linguistic proficiency and cultural
competence to read literature and newspapers and to live and study in a German-speaking country.
They are encouraged to take part in our biennial program in Berlin or to pursue overseas study with
other approved programs. Students will gain the skills to engage with important writers, thinkers,
creators, and discoverers in the original German.
The courses 101, 102, 103, and 204 (205 taught overseas in Berlin) are a sequential series of
courses designed to provide the foundation for pursuing advanced work in language, literature and
culture, while exposing students to examples of literary, philosophical, musical and artistic
expression right from the start. German 210-219 offer students the opportunity to delve deeper into
specific topics, ranging from current news, to genre studies, to themes such as migration, the body,
or film. Admission to these courses without taking German 204 is determined either by appropriate
AP or other placement test scores, or by successful completion of the previous course in the
sequence. Courses beyond 103 have a number of goals: to refine and expand students' linguistic
ability, to give students access to great works of literature and culture, to broaden their cultural
understanding, to improve their ability to engage in critical analysis, and to help them better
understand themselves and the human condition. In class discussions, attention is focused on
universal themes and concerns within the broad context of German culture. Courses numbered 150159 are survey courses in translation with no prerequisites. Other courses in translation are also
offered, which open interdisciplinary ways of study.
Requirements for the German Major
66 credits, including the following:




12 credits of GERM 210‐219
6 credits of GERM 150‐159
6 credits of LCST 245 (best taken during the junior year)

Students who have done advanced work in a different field may petition to substitute a
comparable methods course in another department. Approval of the advisor and permission of the
instructor is required.





12 credits of courses in German numbered GERM 300 or higher
24 elective credits of courses in German or courses in English related to German culture (these may
include GERM 204 or 205, as well as courses in related fields outside the German Department)
o HIST 250 Modern Germany
o HIST 346 The Holocaust
o LING 232 Structure and History of German (not offered in 2022‐23)
6 credits for the Integrative Exercise (comps)

Courses 101, 102, and 103 do not count toward the major.
Programs Abroad: Participation in Carleton German Programs or in another approved foreign
study program is highly recommended for students majoring in German. Students interested in a
program abroad that is not affiliated with Carleton should consult with a faculty member in German
and with the Director of Off-Campus Studies as well as the Registrar.

205

Language Houses: Students have the opportunity to immerse themselves in the language by living
in the Parish International House where they can organize and participate in numerous cultural
activities led by German-speaking language associate. Other activities outside the classroom include
a German lunch table in the dining halls, film nights, Kaffeeklatsch, a German study table in the
library, "Cook and Study" events, and many more.
Requirements for the German Minor
36 credits beyond German 103 as follows:




12 credits from courses numbered German 210‐219
12 credits from courses numbered 250 or higher, 6 of which must be at the 300 level
12 elective credits of courses in German or courses in English related to German culture (these may
include GERM 204 or 205, 150‐159, as well as courses in related fields outside the German
Department)
o HIST 250 Modern Germany
o HIST 346 The Holocaust
o LING 232 Structure and History of German (not offered in 2022‐23)

No more than 12 credits from non-Carleton off-campus studies programs may be applied toward the
minor.
German Courses
GERM 100 Seeking Shelter in a Dangerous World Where do I feel at home? What causes me to feel not at
home in certain spaces? In the face of transforming societies and environments, can a stable sense of home
be preserved—and should it be? In this course, we will study texts from a wide range of geographic
locations and cultural backgrounds that investigate the stakes of creating a sense of home within
unfamiliar, unwelcoming, and seemingly ruined environments. Ultimately, we will seek ways to think both
critically and creatively about human environments, both in cultural texts and in our own reflection on the
places we call home. 6 credits; AI, WR1, IS; Fall; Seth E Peabody
GERM 101 Elementary German This course introduces the basic structures of the German language and
everyday vocabulary in the context of common cultural situations and authentic and fictional media.
Students are exposed to all four skills (reading, writing, listening, and speaking). 6 credits; NE; Fall; Juliane
Schicker
GERM 102 Elementary German Building on the material covered in German 101, this course introduces
more complex structures and exposes students to short literary and cultural texts as well as other media.
The focus of the course is on all four skills (reading, writing, listening, and speaking). Prerequisite: German
101 or equivalent. 6 credits; NE; Winter; Kiley Kost
GERM 103 Intermediate German Continuation of the study of complex structural patterns of the German
language, and the reading and discussion of longer texts, films, and other media from German‐speaking
cultures. Prerequisite: German 102 or equivalent. 6 credits; NE; Spring; Seth E Peabody
GERM 150 German Music and Culture from Mozart to Rammstein In this course, we survey significant
developments in German‐language culture, broadly defined, from the Enlightenment to the twentieth
century. Students of all disciplines and majors are invited to receive an overview of the music and culture of
Germany, Austria, and Switzerland, starting in the 1750s and tracing its impact into the present time. The

206
course includes literature, film, music, language, history, habits, news, etc., and surveys major figures,
movements, and their influence on the world’s civilization. The course encourages critical engagement with
the material at hand and provides the opportunity to compare it with the students’ own cultural
background. Taught in English. 6 credits; LA, IS, WR2; Spring; Juliane Schicker
GERM 152 Personhood What is it to be human? What is the difference between human and animal? How
do technology and AI alter our understanding of humanity? How does the rhetoric of personhood affect our
judgment of others? What is an immigrant, a migrant, a refugee, a foreigner, an alien? In this English‐
language survey of German thought and literature, we will ask these questions with foundational
philosophers from the Enlightenment to the present, engage with contemporary theorists on post‐
colonialism and nationalism, and rethink the concept of personhood by analyzing crucial new contributions
from literature, theater, film, and art. Taught in English. 6 credits; LA, WR2, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
GERM 204 Intermediate German In this course, students build on their communication skills to engage in
more in‐depth spoken and written discussions of German‐speaking literature, art, and culture. By analyzing
longer and more challenging texts, films and other cultural media, continuing grammar review, and writing
compositions, students acquire greater facility and confidence in all four language skills (writing, speaking,
listening, and reading). Prerequisite: German 103 or equivalent. 6 credits; NE; Fall; Seth E Peabody
GERM 205 Berlin Program: Intermediate Composition and Conversation This course is designed for students
with intermediate proficiency in German, who wish to extend their knowledge of German language and
culture through reading, discussions, and writing. Students will work on developing the ability to articulate
opinions, exchange substantive information and to argue points of view; honing analytic and interpretive
writing skills; and expanding their linguistic toolkit. The class format features discussions with grammar
exercises interspersed as needed. Prerequisite: German 103 or equivalent and acceptance in Berlin
Program. 6 credits; NE; Fall; Kiley Kost
GERM 208 Coffee and News An excellent opportunity to brush up your German while learning about
current issues in German‐speaking countries. Relying on magazines, newspapers, podcasts, and streamings,
students will discuss common topics and themes once a week to exchange their ideas over snacks with a
small group of students. Prerequisite: German 204 or equivalent. 2 credits; S/CR/NC; HI, IS; Fall; Juliane
Schicker
GERM 212 Contemporary Germany in Global Context Over the past few years, Germany has been touted as
the new leader of Europe, or even of the “free world,” and at the same time has seen a surge of bitter
political division within its borders. The Berlin Wall fell thirty years ago, yet tensions between East and West
remain stark. Chancellor Angela Merkel implemented an open‐arms policy toward refugees, yet the
extremist AfD party has orchestrated a troubling rise to power based on xenophobic sentiments. And while
Germany has emerged as a global environmental leader, it has simultaneously faced passionate protest
from its own youth regarding failure to meet the challenges of climate change. In this class, we examine the
complexities behind these seeming contradictions in contemporary Germany by analyzing diverse texts
ranging from political speeches to poetry slams. Taught in German; advanced grammar review supports
analytical tasks. Prerequisite: German 204 or equivalent. 6 credits; HI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
GERM 214 What’s New: The Latest Works in German‐Speaking Media What products in literature, film, and
other media did German‐speaking audiences consume in the recent past? What topics do artists address
and media outlets discuss? In this course, we will read, watch, and examine various texts and films that
were published or premiered in the last ten years or so in the German language. These works, written by a
diverse range of artists, reflect on and respond to the turbulent recent history not only in Germany, Austria,

207
and Switzerland, but also more globally. They will help us determine how people express their most urgent
challenges and how these texts participate in public debates. Prerequisite: German 204 or the equivalent. 6
credits; LA, IS; Winter; Juliane Schicker
GERM 216 German Short Prose The course introduces students to the joys and challenges of reading short
German fictional and non‐fictional texts of various genres from three centuries, including fairy tales,
aphorisms, short stories, novellas, tweets, essays, and newspaper articles. We will read slowly and with an
eye to grammar and vocabulary building, while also concentrating on developing an understanding of
German cultural history. Texts and class discussions will be in German. Prerequisite: German 204 or
equivalent. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
GERM 221 (re/ex)press yourself: Sexuality and Gender in Fin‐de‐Siècle Literature and Art In this course, we
will explore literature and art of German‐speaking countries around the topics of gender and sex(uality).
We will focus on the years between 1880 and 1920, but also venture into more recent times. What was the
image of men and women at the time and how did these images change or remain the same? How did
science factor into these images? What was/is considered “normal” when it comes to sex(uality) and
gender, and what German‐speaking voices have been pushing against those norms? How did these voices
use literature and art to reflect or criticize such norms? Texts and class discussions will be in English. 6
credits; HI, WR2, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
GERM 223F Thinking Green in German Prerequisite: German 204 or equivalent and concurrent registration
in German 223. 2 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
GERM 223 Thinking Green: Sustainability, Literature, and Culture in Germany Germany is a recognized
worldwide leader in environmental movements thanks to the nuclear power phase‐out, the renewable
energy transition, and the rise of the Green Party. Similarly, there is a long aesthetic tradition depicting
nature and the nonhuman world in German‐language literature and poetry. In this course, conducted in
English, we will trace the development of contemporary Germany’s environmental practices through its
literary and cultural legacy by reading and analyzing texts from established writers and thinkers. We will
connect these literary and historic roots to contemporary environmental issues, look at successful protest
movements, and explore Germany as a model for environmental initiatives and engaged citizenship around
the globe. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
GERM 247 Mirror, Mirror: Reflecting on Fairy Tales and Folklore Many people are familiar with the fairy
tales collected and published by the Brothers Grimm and have seen iterations of such stories in animated
Disney films and live‐action reboots. In this class, taught in English, we will critically examine folktales,
consider their role in shaping societal standards and how they spread specific values across cultures. We
will study the origins of Grimms’ fairy tales before discussing their larger role across media and cultures.
Our study of traditional German fairy tales will be informed by contemporary theoretical approaches
including feminist theory, ecocriticism, psychology, and animal studies. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐
23
GERM 251 Identity, Belonging, and Spaces of Home in the Works of Fatma Aydemir In this course, offered
in conjunction with the Christopher Light Lectureship, we will familiarize ourselves with the work of
contemporary German author Fatma Aydemir, focussing particularly on her publications that deal with
questions of migration and Heimat. We will read and discuss several fictional and nonfictional texts,
participate in a creative nonfiction workshop and other events with Aydemir herself, and exhibit final
projects at a public event. Prerequisite: German 204 or equivalent or instructor consent. 2 credits; LA, IS;
Not offered 2022‐23

208
GERM 258 Berlin Program: Berlin Memory Politics Vergangenheitsbewältigung is the German word for
reconciling the past; it is a process that has shaped collective memory in Germany and other European
countries since the end of the Holocaust and World War II. Berlin in particular has been formed by its
difficult history and memories, the traces of which are visible in the city today. In this class, we will examine
the relationship between history, memory, and collective identity in Germany. How are narratives of the
past preserved in the present? Which stories are told, which are left out, and who makes these decisions?
How does the geography of a city interact with its history? How do memorials impact public space? In
addition to analyzing fiction, essays, and visual culture, we will also confront this topic through several field
trips and walks in Berlin. Prerequisite: German 103 or equivalent and acceptance in Berlin program. 6
credits; HI, IS; Fall; Kiley Kost
GERM 259 Berlin Program: German in Motion: Migration, Place and Displacement How is your identity
connected to a certain place? And what happens when you leave that place, either voluntarily or out of
necessity? In this course, we will learn about migration in German‐speaking countries by reading historical
and contemporary texts and researching policies on asylum and migration. We will critically examine
concepts of the nation and nationality in historical contexts, learn about artists in exile, and encounter
contemporary perspectives on migration in Europe. Course activities will include several site visits in Berlin.
By reading and analyzing texts by Hannah Arendt, Bertolt Brecht, Anna Seghers, Ilse Aichinger, Paul Celan,
May Ayim, Emine Sevgi Özdamar, Yoko Tawada, and Fatma Aydemir among many others, we will become
mindful readers of different literary genres and craft thoughtful analyses on topics connected to migration.
Prerequisite: German 103 or equivalent and acceptance in Berlin program. 6 credits; LA, IS; Fall; Kiley Kost
GERM 267 Catastrophe! Natural Disaster in German Literature Are natural disasters ever really natural? In
this course, taught in German, we will read works of literature and poetry that portray disaster. Focusing on
disaster as the site of interaction between humans and the environment, we will explore and discuss the
impact of modern technology, contemporary environmental issues, and the concept of disaster in the
shadow of war. Thinking in terms of environmental justice, we will also consider who is impacted by such
disasters and in what ways. We will read various genres of literature including works by Hoffmann, Frisch,
Wolf, Haushofer and Maron among many others. Prerequisite: German 204 or equivalent. 6 credits; LA, IS;
Not offered 2022‐23
GERM 274 Weimar Germany: Art, Culture, and the Failure of Democracy "...many will say: even 1920 is not
so horrible. This is how it is: the human being is a machine, culture is in shreds, education is arrogance,
spirit is brutality, stupidity is the norm, and the military is sovereign" (Adolf Behne, reporting on a Dada art
exhibit). In this class, taught in German, students examine cultural products and visual media of and about
the Weimar Republic to understand a critical time in German history and explore how art has been used to
cope with societal turbulence. Note: German majors and minors may complete additional work to count
this class toward the 300‐level course credit requirement. Prerequisite: German 204 or equivalent. 6
credits; LA, IS; Spring; Kiley Kost
GERM 305 Berlin Program: Advanced Composition and Conversation This course is designed for students
with advanced proficiency in German, who wish to extend their knowledge of German language and culture
through reading, discussions, and writing. Students will work on developing the ability to articulate
opinions, exchange substantive information and to argue points of view; honing analytic and interpretive
writing skills; and expanding their linguistic toolkit. The class format features discussions with grammar
exercises interspersed as needed. Prerequisite: German 204 or equivalent. 6 credits; NE; Fall; Kiley Kost
GERM 320 Life under Socialism: Culture and Society in East Germany What was life like under “actually
existing socialism?” What films, books, music, and other media did people in the German Democratic

209
Republic (or East Germany) consume and how did they cope with their country’s dictatorship? How can the
experiences of people—particularly women—living in the GDR provide useful context for contemporary
socio‐political issues in the United States and beyond? We will discuss topics such as gender equality,
education, health care, and queer life in the GDR. Taught in German. Prerequisite: German 204 or
equivalent. 6 credits; HI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
GERM 321 On the Edge: Monsters, Robots, and Cyborgs In this course, taught in German, students explore
nonhuman figures in literature and film. How do authors and filmmakers depict monsters, robots, cyborgs,
and other nonhumans? And what do these figures reveal about what makes us human? By tracing the
boundaries of the human through notable texts, we consider the cultural, psychological, and technological
implications of these almost‐human figures. Selected works include texts by E. T. A. Hoffmann, Franz Kafka,
Sharon Dodua Otoo and films by Fritz Lang and F. W. Murnau. Prerequisite: German 204 or equivalent or
instructor consent. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
GERM 342 Faust and the Soul We all know the story: Faust sells his soul to the devil. It does change over
time though: once for 24 years of magic, then for knowledge, also for bliss. From the first Faust book via
Christopher Marlowe’s play, to Goethe’s masterpiece and Thomas Mann’s novel, all the way to
contemporary film and even Homer Simpson selling his soul for a donut, what is at stake in the Faust
legend? Just what is the soul? Via the figure of Faust, how can we understand key periods and works in
German‐language literature, film, and thought throughout the ages? Taught in German. Prerequisite:
German 204 or equivalent. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
GERM 359 Berlin Program: German in Motion: Migration, Place, and Displacement How is your identity
connected to a certain place? And what happens when you leave that place, either voluntarily or out of
necessity? In this course, we will learn about migration in German‐speaking countries by reading historical
and contemporary texts and researching policies on asylum and migration. We will critically examine
concepts of the nation and nationality in historical contexts, learn about artists in exile, and encounter
contemporary perspectives on migration in Europe. Course activities will include several site visits in Berlin.
By reading and analyzing texts by Hannah Arendt, Bertolt Brecht, Anna Seghers, Ilse Aichinger, Paul Celan,
May Ayim, Emine Sevgi Özdamar, Yoko Tawada, and Fatma Aydemir among many others, we will become
mindful readers of different literary genres and craft thoughtful analyses on topics connected to migration.
Prerequisite: German 103 or equivalent and acceptance in Berlin Program. 6 credits; LA, IS; Fall; Kiley Kost
GERM 400 Integrative Exercise Examining an aspect of German literature across eras or genres. 1‐6 credit;
S/NC; Spring

Hebrew
See Middle Eastern Languages.

History
The History major introduces students to major civilizations of the past and develops skills of
research, analysis, expression that are essential to students in the Liberal Arts environment. These
skills are also relevant to all careers and professions. History majors learn not only what happened
in the past, but also how to explain significant elements of continuity and how to analyze moments
of profound rupture. Thus a History major develops a deep appreciation for the durable phenomena
of world cultures (the persistence of poverty, the transcendence of genius, the corruption of political

210

power), as well as a keen analytical framework for understanding transformative moments in time
(the American, Mexican and French Revolutions, the Civil Rights Movement, etc.)
In view of the variety of departmental offerings, History majors are allowed to design their own mix
of courses. The department offers guidelines, attentive advising, and carefully selected requirements
to ensure coherence in the student's growing mastery of the discipline. Still, much of the choice on
specific courses is left up to the individual student. The student's pathway through the major should
reflect his or her particular interests, abilities and career plans.
See History Department Web site: https://apps.carleton.edu/curricular/history/
Requirements for the History Major
All majors must complete 72 credits, fulfilling the following requirements:







A primary history field (24 credits)
Two historical subfields (12 credits each)
History 298: Junior Colloquium (6 credits)
History 398: Advanced Historical Writing (6 credits)
History 400: Comprehensive exercise (6 credits)
Two 300‐level Research Seminars (12 credits total) (described below)

The History department offers eight broad Historical Fields. Majors select three fields from the
eight that best relate to their research interests as their primary field and subfields. Courses can, of
course be taken in all eight fields.
1. Africa & Its Diaspora—People of African descent inside & outside the African continent.
2. Ancient/Medieval—The worlds of Classical and Hellenistic Greece, Republican and Imperial Rome,
the world of Late Antiquity (fourth‐seventh centuries), medieval Europe (fourth‐fifteenth
centuries), and the medieval Mediterranean (including Byzantium, the Near East, and North Africa).
History courses in Classics count towards this field.
3. Asia (East Asia, South Asia, Central Asia and Middle East)—Covers East, South and Central Asia
(Middle East), with additional courses from Political Science.
4. The Atlantic World—Relationship between Europe, Africa, & the Americas, ca. 1500‐1820, through
circulation of people, goods, and ideas.
5. Early Modern/Modern Europe—Early Modern and Modern European history (including Russia) with
additional courses in European Studies and Economics taught by historians.
6. Environment and Health—Environmental history, the history of disease, and the history of
medicine.
7. Latin America—The pre‐Hispanic, colonial and post‐colonial eras of the region with an emphasis on
Mesoamerica, the Andes, the Southern Cone, Brazil, and Cuba.
8. United States—U.S., AfAm, environment, immigration, labor, public and Women's and Gender
History, with additional courses in American Studies and Economics.

Thematic primary historical field
In addition to these fields, a major may also design his/her own thematic primary field (four
courses) in consultation with the major adviser to devise a program of study that uses existing
courses, relevant courses from other departments, independent studies, and off-campus studies

211

program courses. Examples of thematic primary field topics of past majors: Middle East History,
Gender and History, Colonialism, Immigration History, Comparative Revolutions, Economic
History, and others. Please note that a thematic historical sub-field (two courses) is not offered.
Please ask the History department chair or your adviser about any courses in Africana Studies,
American Studies, Asian Studies, Classics, Cross Cultural Studies, Digital Humanities, Economics,
Education, European Studies, Environmental and Technology Studies, Gender, Women's &
Sexuality Studies, Latin American Studies, Religion, or other special courses offered by an historian
in another department if you wish to apply them toward the history major.
Multiple Field Course Tags
Please note, some courses are tagged to count in more than one History field. It is possible to
change your primary field or sub-fields should your interests change, and a multi-tagged course
might be moved to one of your new fields. However, no course can ever count for more than one
field at a time.
Off Campus Studies Courses
Approved History courses from Off-Campus Study Programs may also satisfy your History field
requirements. For approval, please consult the Department Chair.
300-level Courses and Independent Studies






If one of your two 300‐level courses is counted toward your primary or subfields, you will not need
another History course to reach your 72 credits. However, if both of your 300‐level courses are
counted toward your primary and/or sub‐fields, one additional History course that has not been
previously counted is required. This additional course can be a History department elective course
in any field, or an AP, IB or College and department approved OCS course—any one of which can be
used to help you to meet the 72‐credit minimum.
An Independent Study at any level may count toward your History field requirements with
instructor approval. A 300‐level Independent Study does not fulfill either of the two 300‐level
seminar requirements.
History 398 does not fulfill either of the two 300‐level seminar requirements.

Requirements for the History Minor
Historical knowledge and analysis play a central role in the humanities and social sciences. The
skills in research and the evaluation of diverse forms of evidence can be transferred to many other
disciplines across the College as well as careers. The global interests of the department’s faculty
also means that History is a very good place to develop an interest in a specific region of the world
or time-period. The History minor requirements offer students a clear, flexible yet structured
exposure to the discipline that provides a valuable complement to their other program/s.
Students must complete a total of 36 credits including:


30 elective credits to be drawn from at least two of our eight existing History fields:

212

o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o






United States
Ancient and Medieval
Early Modern and Modern Europe
Asia‐South, East, and Central (Middle East)
Africa and Its Diaspora
Latin America
The Atlantic World
Environment and Health

Courses must be drawn from both the modern and pre‐modern eras
At least 6 credits must be a Carleton History Department 300‐level seminar. Note: a 300‐level
independent study does not fulfill the 300‐level seminar requirement
A maximum of two courses from outside the History department or from Carleton or non‐Carleton
OCS programs may count towards the minor, subject to departmental approval
HIST 298: Junior Colloquium (6 credits), to gain an understanding of historical methods and broader
developments in the History field.

The progress to completion of a minor will be tracked by the Chair or History department adviser
with the assistance of the Administrative Assistant for History, all of whom will serve as resources
for minors should they require more specific guidance.
History Courses
HIST 100 Confucius and His Critics An introduction to the study of historical biography. Instead of what we
heard or think about Confucius, we will examine what his contemporaries, both his supporters and critics,
thought he was. Students will scrutinize various sources gleaned from archaeology, heroic narratives, and
court debates, as well as the Analects to write their own biography of Confucius based on a particular
historical context that created a persistent constitutional agenda in early China. Students will justify why
they would call such a finding, in hindsight, "Confucian" in its formative days. Themes can be drawn from
aspects of ritual, bureaucracy, speech and writing 6 credits; AI, WR1, IS; Fall; Seungjoo Yoon
HIST 100 Exploration, Science, and Empire This course provides an introduction to the global history of
exploration. We will examine the scientific and artistic aspects of expeditions, and consider how scientific
knowledge‐‐navigation, medicinal treatments, or the collection of scientific specimens‐‐helped make
exploration, and subsequently Western colonialism, possible. We will also explore how the visual and
literary representations of exotic places shaped distant audiences’ understandings of empire and of the so‐
called races of the world. Art and science helped form the politics of Western nationalism and expansion;
this course will explore some of the ways in which their legacy remains with us today. 6 credits; AI, WR1, IS;
Fall; Antony E Adler
HIST 100 Gandhi, Nationalism and Colonialism in South Asia The struggle for independence from colonial
rule in the Indian subcontinent involved a wide array of nationalist movements, prominently including the
struggle led by M. K. Gandhi, who forged a movement centered on non‐violence and civil disobedience
which brought down the mighty British empire. We will study this alongside numerous other powerful
nationalist currents, particularly those based on Islamic ideas and symbols. A significant part of the course
will involve a historical role‐playing game, Reacting to the Past: Defining a Nation, wherein students will
take on roles of actual historical figures and recreate a twentieth century debate about religious identity
and nation‐building in the colonial context. 6 credits; AI, WR1, IS; Fall; Brendan P LaRocque

213
HIST 100 Trials in Early America An enormous variety of people told stories of their lives in early America’s
courtrooms. Trials from the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries are some of the best places for
historians to learn about ordinary people and the world in which they lived. Enslaved Africans, pregnant
women, wealthy men, and even transgender people were part of early American trials. Sometimes they
were there to defend themselves, their lives, and their choices. Others were there as plaintiffs who tried to
use the legal system to shape the world around them. Emphasizing both history and law, this course will be
based primarily on trial transcripts and other court papers from seventeenth‐ and eighteenth‐century
America. 6 credits; AI, WR1; Fall; Serena R Zabin
HIST 100 Unknown Latin America As a region, Latin America is famous for the warmth of its people, its
historic sites, and its natural wonders. At the same time, it is often treated as a periphery plagued by
underdevelopment, violence, and social, economic, and political troubles. This course explores important
histories of peoples, places, and events in Latin America that are not widely known yet challenge these
stereotypes in fundamental ways. Through primary sources, scholarship, projects, and discussion, we will
examine these histories to understand the conditions, connections, and actions that created "bright
chapters" and advanced important movements, products, people, and ideas in the political, economic,
social, and cultural lives of countries in the region. 6 credits; AI, WR1, IS; Fall; Pedro F Quijada
HIST 111 Uncharted Waters: The History of Society and the Sea This course introduces students
to maritime history, marine environmental history, and issues in contemporary marine policy. While
traditional histories have framed the sea as an empty space and obstacle to be traversed, or as a
battleground, we will approach the ocean as a contact zone, a space of labor, and as the site of focused
scientific research, thereby emphasizing human interaction with the oceans. We will examine how people
have come to know, utilize, and govern the world’s oceans across time and space, and we will explore how
this history informs contemporary issues in maritime law, governance, and ocean conservation. 6 credits;
HI, WR2, IS; Winter; Antony E Adler
HIST 112 Freedom of Expression: A Global History Celebrated as the bedrock of democracy, freedom of
expression is often seen as an American or western value. Yet the concept has a rich and global history. In
this course we will track the long and turbulent history of freedom of expression from ancient Athens and
medieval Islamic societies to the Enlightenment and the drive for censorship in totalitarian and colonial
societies. Among the questions we will consider are: How have the parameters of free expression changed
and developed over time? What is the relationship between free speech and political protest? How has free
speech itself been weaponized? How does an understanding of the history of free speech help us think
about the challenges of combating hatred and misinformation in today’s internet age? 6 credits; HI, IS;
Spring; Amna Khalid
HIST 116 Intro to Indigenous Histories, 1887‐present Many Americans grow up with a fictionalized view of
Indigenous people (sometimes also called Native Americans/American Indians, Alaska Natives, and Native
Hawaiians within the U.S. context). Understanding Indigenous peoples’ histories, presents, and possible
futures requires moving beyond these stereotypes and listening to Indigenous perspectives. In this class, we
will begin to learn about Indigenous peoples across Turtle Island and the Pacific through tribal histories,
legislation, Supreme Court cases, and personal narratives. The course will focus on the period from 1887 to
2018 with major themes including (among others) agency, resistance, resilience, settler colonialism,
discrimination, and structural racism. 6 credits; HI, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 122 U.S. Women's History to 1877 Gender, race, and class shaped women's participation in the arenas
of work, family life, culture, and politics in the United States from the colonial period to the late nineteenth
century. We will examine diverse women's experiences of colonization, industrialization, slavery and

214
Reconstruction, religion, sexuality and reproduction, and social reform. Readings will include both primary
and secondary sources, as well as historiographic articles outlining major frameworks and debates in the
field of women's history. 6 credits; HI, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 123 U.S. Women's History Since 1877 In the twentieth century women participated in the redefinition
of politics and the state, sexuality and family life, and work and leisure as the United States became a
modern, largely urban society. We will explore how the dimensions of race, class, ethnicity, and sexuality
shaped diverse women's experiences of these historical changes. Topics will include: immigration, the
expansion of the welfare system and the consumer economy, labor force segmentation and the world wars,
and women's activism in civil rights, labor, peace and feminist movements. 6 credits; HI, IDS; Not offered
2022‐23
HIST 125 African American History I: From Africa to the Civil War This course is a survey of early African
American history. It will introduce students to major themes and events while also covering historical
interpretations and debates in the field. Core themes of the course include migration, conflict, and culture.
Beginning with autonomous African politics, the course traces the development of the United States
through the experiences of enslaved and free African American women and men to the Civil War. The main
aim of the course is for students to become familiar with key issues and developments in African American
history and their centrality to understanding U.S. history. 6 credits; HI, IDS; Winter; Rebecca J Brueckmann
HIST 126 African American History II The transition from slavery to freedom; the post‐Reconstruction
erosion of civil rights and the ascendancy of Booker T. Washington; protest organizations and mass
migration before and during World War I; the postwar resurgence of black nationalism; African Americans
in the Great Depression and World War II; roots of the modern Civil Rights movement, and black female
activism. 6 credits; HI, IDS; Fall; Rebecca J Brueckmann
HIST 127 The Roaring Twenties & the Rough Thirties in U.S. History This course will probe the domestic
history of the U.S. from 1919 to 1939 and the cultural, economic, political, and social changes
accompanying America’s evolution into a modern society. Themes include: developments in work, leisure,
and consumption; impact of depression on the organization of the public and private sectors; persistence of
traditional values such as individualism and the success ethos in shaping responses to change; and the
evolving diversity of America and the American experience. 6 credits; HI, IDS, QRE; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 128 Slavery and Universities: Past and Present This class examines the history of colleges and
universities and their connections to the political economy of Atlantic slavery and colonialism. Students will
examine how the inception and evolution of American higher education was inextricably tied to the
pocketbooks of enslavers as well as how colleges and universities directly benefited from the labor of
enslaved people and the dispossession of Native Americans. Students will consider questions such as what
is the role of the university in society. Central to the course will be studying this history’s impact in our own
time. We will examine how scholars, activists, and university communities are grappling with these histories
and their legacies today. 6 credits; HI, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 131 Saints and Society in Late Antiquity In Late Antiquity (200‐800 CE), certain men and women
around the Mediterranean and beyond came to occupy a special place in the minds and lives of their
contemporaries: they were known as holy men and women or saints. What led people to perceive someone
as holy? What were the consequences of holiness for the persons themselves and the surrounding
societies? When they intervene in their worlds, what are their sources of authority and power? How did
these holy figures relate to the established institutions‐‐secular and religious‐‐that surrounded
them? Working with a rich array of evidence, we will explore themes such as asceticism, embodied and

215
verbal pedagogy, wealth and poverty, work, marginality, cultural difference, and protest/resistance. We will
journey from the lands of Gaul, Italy, and Spain to North Africa and Egypt and the Holy Land, to Armenia
and the Fertile Crescent. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IS; Fall; William L North
HIST 133 Crisis, Creativity, and Transformation in Late Antiquity This course investigates the dramatic
transformations that shaped the eastern Mediterranean world and surrounding regions between ca. 250‐
850 CE. We will focus in particular on how people in late antiquity used environmental, institutional, socio‐
economic, and cultural resources to address an ongoing series of changes and challenges in their worlds. It
also examines these responses from multiple perspectives: winners and losers, elites and non‐elites, people
of different ethnicities and cultures, urban and rural populations, and diverse religious groups and sects
within these groups. The emergence and implications of Christianity and Islam as major organizing
identities will also be explored. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 135 Making and Breaking Institutions in the Middle Ages: Structure, Culture, Corruption, and Reform
From churches and monasteries to universities, guilds, and governmental administrations, the medieval
world was full of institutions. They emerged, by accident or design, to do particular kinds of work and to
benefit particular persons or groups. These institutions faced hard questions like those we ask of our
institutions today: How best to structure, distribute, and control power and authority? What is the place of
the institution in the wider world? How is a collective identity and ethos achieved, maintained, or
transformed? How does the institution as a material community relate to the institution’s mission and
culture, the institution as a concept/ideal? What characterizes good and bad leadership? Where does
corruption and abuse of power come from and what motivates and advances reform? This course will
explore these questions through discussion of case studies and primary sources from the medieval world as
well as theoretical studies of these topics. 6 credits; HI, QRE, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 137 Early Medieval Worlds in Transformation In this course we will explore a variety of distinct but
interconnected worlds that existed between ca.300 and ca.1050. We will interrogate primary sources,
especially written and visual materials, as they bear witness to people forming and transforming political,
social, religious, and cultural values, ideas and structures. We will work to understand how communities
adapt to new conditions and challenges while maintaining links with and repurposing the lifeways, ideas,
and material cultures of the past. We will watch as new and different groups and institutions come to
power, and how the existing peoples and structures respond and change. Projects in this course will build
capacity to interpret difficult primary documents, formulate research questions, and build arguments that
combine rigor and humane sympathy. 6 credits; HI, IS, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 138 Crusades, Mission, and the Expansion of Europe This course examines the complex and sometimes
contradictory roles of crusade and mission in the gradual expansion of Europe (eleventh ‐fifteenth century)
into the eastern Mediterranean, the Iberian peninsula, the Baltic, and even Central Asia. We will examine
questions like: What did "crusade" or "mission" mean? How did people respond to, resist, or co‐opt these
enterprises? Did crusade and mission expand Europeans' knowledge of other cultures? In addition to
critical analysis of primary sources and current scholarship, the course will offer opportunities to share
knowledge with a broader public. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 139 Foundations of Modern Europe A narrative and survey of the early modern period (fifteenth
through eighteenth centuries). The course examines the Renaissance, Reformation, Contact with the
Americas, the Scientific Revolution and Enlightenment. We compare the development of states and
societies across Western Europe, with particularly close examination of the history of Spain. 6 credits; HI, IS,
QRE; Not offered 2022‐23

216
HIST 140 The Age of Revolutions: Modern Europe, 1789‐1914 This course traces the evolution of Europe
from the French Revolution to the outbreak of World War I, and examines some of the political, social,
economic, intellectual, and cultural forces that have shaped and reshaped European society. We will cover
the growth of modern nation‐states, the industrial revolution and its effects on society, changes in the
family and gender roles, and the evolution of modern consciousness in the arts, literature, and philosophy.
The course will strive to look at both Western and Eastern Europe, and will conclude with a close
examination of the causes of the First World War. 6 credits; HI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 141 Europe in the Twentieth Century This course explores developments in European history in a
global context from the final decade of the nineteenth century through to the present. We will focus on the
impact of nationalism, war, and revolution on the everyday experiences of women and men, and also look
more broadly on the chaotic economic, political, social, and cultural life of the period. Of particular interest
will be the rise of fascism and communism, and the challenge to Western‐style liberal democracy, followed
by the Cold War and communism’s collapse near the end of the century. 6 credits; HI, IS; Not offered 2022‐
23
HIST 143 Modern Italy in the Mediterranean World Italy’s path to modernity has been conditioned to a
significant degree by its position in the Mediterranean. This course examines the history of the modern
Italian nation‐state from its formation during the nineteenth century up to the present day, paying special
attention to Italy’s engagement with the Mediterranean Basin. Looking at trade, culture, immigration, and
colonialism in Libya and East Africa, the course stresses the extent to which Italians have shaped, and been
shaped by, the Mediterranean world and its peoples. 6 credits; HI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 145 History of Computing in England Program: World War II History This course will consider the broad
context of World War II, from the British perspective. Topics will include a variety of aspects of the British
experience both at home and abroad, including military, political, and social; the course will include a
number of excursions to relevant sites, including the Churchill War Rooms, Bletchley Park, and buildings
damaged or destroyed in the Blitz. 6 credits; HI, IS; Summer; David Liben‐Nowell
HIST 150 Politics of Art in Early Imperial China Poetry has been playing an important role in politics from
early China down to the present. Members of the educated elite have used this form of artistic expression
to create political allegories in times of war and diplomacy. Students will learn the multiple roles that poet‐
censors played in early imperial China, with thematic attention given to issues of self and ethnic/gendered
identity, internal exile and nostalgia, and competing religious orientations that eventually fostered the rise
of Neo‐Confucianism. Students will write a short biography of a poet by sampling her/his poems and
poetics (all in translation) from the common reading pool. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IS; Spring; Seungjoo Yoon
HIST 151 History of Modern Japan This course explores the modern transformation of Japanese society,
politics, economy and culture from the Meiji Restoration of 1868 to the present. It is designed to provide
students with an opportunity to explore basic issues and problems relating to modern Japanese history and
international relations. Topics include the intellectual crisis of the late Tokugawa period, the Meiji
Constitution, the development of an interior democracy, class and gender, the rise of Japanese fascism, the
Pacific War, and postwar developments. 6 credits; HI, IS; Winter; Seungjoo Yoon
HIST 152 History of Early China At what point can we talk about the formation of China as an organized
political entity? What did it mean to be Chinese at different points in time? This course is an introduction to
the history of China from its beginnings to the end of the Han dynasty in 220. Students will examine the
emergence of philosophical debates on human nature, historical consciousness of time and recording, and
ritual theories in formation. Students will focus on the interplay between statecraft and religion, between

217
ethnicity and identity, and between intellectual (e.g., Confucianism) and socio‐cultural history (e.g.,
feminine and popular mentalities). 6 credits; HI, IS, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 153 History of Modern China This course examines major features of the trajectory of China’s recent
past spanning from the seventeenth century through the present. Students will analyze deep socio‐cultural
currents that cut across the changes in socioeconomic as well as political arenas. Themes for discussion will
include state formations, social changes, economic developments, religious orientations, bureaucratic
behaviors, and cultural refinements that the Chinese have made. Students are also expected to develop
skills to frame key historical questions against broader historiographical contexts by engaging in analyses of
many different types of primary sources. 6 credits; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 154 Social Movements in Postwar Japan This course tackles an evolving meaning of democracy and
sovereignty in postwar Japan shaped by the transformative power of its social movements. We will place
the anti‐nuclear movement and anti‐base struggles of the 1950s, the protest movements against revision of
the U.S.‐Japan Security Treaty of the 1960s, and environmentalist movements against the U.S. Cold War
projects in Asia to see how they intersect with the worldwide “New Left” movements of the 1960s. Topics
include student activism, labor unionism, Marxist movements, and gangsterism (yakuza). Students will
engage with political art, photographs, manga, films, reportage, memoirs, autobiographies, interview
records, novels, and detective stories. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 156 History of Modern Korea A comparative historical survey on the development of Korean society
and culture from the nineteenth century to the present. Key themes include colonialism and war, economic
growth, political transformation, socio‐cultural changes, and historical memory. Issues involving divided
Korea will be examined in the contexts of post‐colonialism and Cold War. Students are also expected to
develop skills to analyze key historical moments from relevant primary sources against broader
historiographical contexts. 6 credits; HI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 157 Health and Medicine in Japan How do Shintoism view childbirth and death? How do Buddhism
and biotechnology intersect in the making of Japan? How do Japanese perceptions about health and
medicine evolve with settler colonialism? This course examines the meaning of body, health, and medicine
in Japan’s recent past when biomedicine came to replace classical Chinese medicine and to gradually
occupy a hegemonic position in its pharmaceutical regime. Reading materials are drawn from illustrations,
travelogues, and poems, as well as medical journals and reports. Themes include body and modern self,
family and reproductive justice, medical colonialism, hygienic modernity, narcotics and ethnopsychology,
and national healthcare system. 6 credits; NE, WR2, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 159 Disaster, Disease, & Rumors in East Asia How are rumors generated and transmitted in a period of
high anxiety like disaster? Do rumors and anxiety reciprocate? How do rumors enhance existing stereotypes
and prejudices of people? Why do rumors arise in a society that suffers from inadequate information or the
complete cutoff in communication? This course classifies the types and nature of rumors at the time of
making modern East Asia. Thematically, it examines the interplay between wartime science, environmental
conditions, and societal capacities in modern Japan, Korea, and China. Topics include rumor panics
generated by epidemic, water pollution, atomic bomb, famine politics, industrial toxins, and lab leaks. 6
credits; HI, WR2, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 161 From Mughals to Mahatma Gandhi: An Introduction to Modern Indian History An introductory
survey course to familiarize students with some of the key themes and debates in the historiography of
modern India. Beginning with an overview of Mughal rule in India, the main focus of the course is the
colonial period. The course ends with a discussion of 1947: the hour of independence as well as the

218
creation of two new nation‐states, India and Pakistan. Topics include Oriental Despotism, colonial rule,
nationalism, communalism, gender, caste and race. No prior knowledge of South Asian History required. 6
credits; HI, IS; Fall; Amna Khalid
HIST 165 From Young Turks to Arab Revolutions: A Cultural History of the Modern Middle East This course
provides a basic introduction to the history of the wider Muslim world from the eighteenth century to the
present. We will discuss the cultural and religious diversity of the Muslim world and its varied interactions
with modernity. We will find that the history of the Muslim world is inextricably linked to that of its
neighbors, and we will encounter colonialism, anti‐colonialism, nationalism, and socialism, as well as a
variety of different Islamic movements. 6 credits; HI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 170 Modern Latin America 1810‐Present Modern Latin American history is marked by both violent
divisions and creative cooperation, nationalist proclamations and imperialist incursions, and democratic
pursuits and dictatorial repression. This course offers a survey of this complex regional history from
independence movements at the beginning of the nineteenth century through globalization in the twenty‐
first century. It addresses methodological issues that include the significance of multiple historical
perspectives and the interpretation of sources. It considers the relationship between individuals and larger
social contexts with an emphasis on race, ethnicity, class, citizenship status, and gender. It places Latin
American culture and politics in regional and global contexts. 6 credits; HI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 181 West Africa in the Era of the Slave Trade The medieval Islamic and the European (or Atlantic) slave
trades have had a tremendous influence on the history of Africa and the African Diaspora. This course
offers an introduction to the history of West African peoples via their involvement in both of these trades
from the fifteenth to the nineteenth century. More specifically, students will explore the demography, the
economics, the social structure, and the ideologies of slavery. They also will learn the repercussions of
these trades for men's and women's lives, for the expansion of coastal and hinterland kingdoms, and for
the development of religious practices and networks. 6 credits; HI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 183 History of Early West Africa This course surveys the history of West Africa during the pre‐colonial
period from 790 to 1590. It chronicles the rise and fall of the kingdoms of Ancient Ghana, Mali, and
Songhai. We will examine the transition from decentralized to centralized societies, the relations between
nomadic and settler groups, the institution of divine kingship, the emergence of new ruling dynasties, the
consolidation of trade networks, and the development of the classical Islamic world. Students will learn
how scholars have used archeological evidence, African oral traditions, and the writings of Muslim travelers
to reconstruct this important era of West African history. 6 credits; HI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 184 Colonial West Africa This course surveys the history of West Africa during the colonial period,
1860‐1960. It offers an introduction to the roles that Islam and Christianity played in establishing and
maintaining colonial rule. It looks at the role of colonialism in shaping African ethnic identities and
introducing new gender roles. In addition, we will examine the transition from slave labor to wage labor,
and its role in exacerbating gender, generation, and class divisions among West Africans. The course also
highlights some of the ritual traditions and cultural movements that flourished in response to colonial rule.
6 credits; HI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 194 The Making of the "Pacific World" The Pacific is the largest ocean on our planet, covering thirty
percent of the Earth’s surface and bordered by four continents. This course will explore how a “Pacific
World” framework can help us understand the movement of peoples, goods, and ideas across an oceanic
space. Can we describe the history of the Pacific as having a unified history? This course will explore various
topics in Pacific history including the history of exploration and migration, cross‐cultural encounters,

219
science and empire, and environmental history from 1750 to the present. While this course will be
transnational in scope, it will focus primarily on U.S. exploration, trade, and the making of an American
Pacific frontier. 6 credits; HI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 200 Historians for Hire A two‐credit course in which students work with faculty oversight to complete
a variety of public history projects with community partners. Students will work on a research project
requiring them to identify and analyze primary sources, draw conclusions from the primary source
research, and share their research with the appropriate audience in an appropriate form. We meet once a
week at Carleton to ensure students maintain professional standards and strong relationships in their work.
Potential projects include educational programming, historical society archival work, and a variety of local
history opportunities. 2 credits; HI, IDS; Fall, Winter, Spring; Antony E Adler, Serena R Zabin
HIST 201 Rome Program: Building Power and Piety in Medieval Italy, CE 300‐1150 Through site visits, on‐
site projects, and readings, this course explores the ways in which individuals and communities attempted
to give physical and visual form to their religious beliefs and political ambitions through their use of
materials, iconography, topography, and architecture. We will also examine how the material legacies of
imperial Rome, Byzantium, and early Christianity served as both resources for and constraints on the
political, cultural, and religious evolution of the Italian peninsula and especially Rome and its environs from
late antiquity through the twelfth century. Among the principal themes will be the development of the cult
of saints, the development of the papal power and authority, Christianization, reform, pilgrimage, and
monasticism. Prerequisite: Acceptance to Carleton Rome Program. 6 credits; HI, IS; Spring; William L North
HIST 203 American Indian Education This course introduces students to the history of settler education for
Indigenous students. In the course, we will engage themes of resistance, assimilation, and educational
violence through an investigation of nation‐to‐nation treaties, federal education legislation, court cases,
student memoirs, film, fiction, and artwork. Case studies will illustrate student experiences in mission
schools, boarding schools, and public schools between the 1600s and the present, asking how Native
people have navigated the educational systems created for their assimilation and how schooling might
function as a tool for Indigenous resurgence in the future. 6 credits; HI, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 205 American Environmental History Environmental concerns, conflicts, and change mark the course
of American history, from the distant colonial past to our own day. This course will consider the nature of
these eco‐cultural developments, focusing on the complicated ways that human thought and perception,
culture and society, and natural processes and biota have all combined to forge Americans' changing
relationship with the natural world. Topics will include Native American subsistence strategies,
Euroamerican settlement, industrialization, urbanization, consumption, and the environmental movement.
As we explore these issues, one of our overarching goals will be to develop an historical context for thinking
deeply about contemporary environmental dilemmas. 6 credits; HI, IDS; Fall, Winter; George H Vrtis
HIST 206 Rome Program: The Eternal City in Time: Structure, Change, and Identity This course will explore
the lived experience of the city of Rome in the twelfth‐sixteenth centuries. Students will study buildings,
urban forms, surviving artifacts, and textual and other visual evidence to understand how politics, power,
and religion (both Christianity and Judaism) mapped onto city spaces. How did urban challenges and
opportunities shape daily life? How did the memory of the past influence the present? How did the rural
world affect the city and vice versa? Students will work on projects closely tied to the urban fabric.
Prerequisite: Enrollment in OCS program. 6 credits; HI, IS; Spring; Victoria Morse
HIST 209 Comparative Atlantic World Slavery This course explores the history of slavery in the Atlantic
World including West Africa, South and Central American, the Caribbean, North America and Europe. The

220
course examines the intersecting themes of power, labor, law, race, gender, sexuality, and resistance. It will
consider how these themes each shaped the construction of different institutions of slavery while
simultaneously focusing on the experiences of the enslaved who lived and died within in these systems. 6
credits; HI, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 210 The Boston Massacre in 3D: Mapping, Modeling and Serious Gaming In this highly experimental,
demanding, and project‐orientated Digital Humanities Lab, we will research, design, and produce
immersive 3D experiences based on the events of the Boston Massacre. We will leverage all the critical,
creative, and technical skills we can assemble to bring this pivotal moment in early American history to life
in 3D. Tools will include GIS and CityEngine procedural mapping software, 3D modeling programs, and the
Unity game engine. No technical experience necessary, but a willingness to learn independently is required.
Prerequisite: Requires concurrent registration in History 212, prior coursework in Computer Science or
Cinema and Media Studies, or instructor permission. 3 credits; ARP; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 211 Revolts and Resistance in Early America Far from being a single entity, America in the seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries was a world of vibrant, polyglot, globally linked, and violent societies. In this
course we will learn how the enslavement of Africans and Native Americans created a state of war that
bridged Europe, America, and Africa. We will examine how indigenous resistance to European settlement
reshaped landscapes and cultures. We will focus throughout on the daily lives of the women and men who
created and shaped the vast world of early America. 6 credits; HI, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 212 The Era of the American Revolution How Revolutionary was the American Revolution? This class
will examine the American Revolution as both a process and a phenomenon. For whom, for what, and how
was the United States created? We will consider the relationship of the American Revolution to social,
cultural, economic, political, and ideological change in the lives of Americans from the founding fathers to
the disenfranchised, focusing on the period 1750‐1790. 6 credits; HI, IDS; Winter; Serena R Zabin
HIST 213 Politics and Protest in the New Nation In the first years of the United States, men and women of
all races had to learn what it meant to live in the nation created by the U.S. Constitution. This class will
focus on the American attempts to form a more perfect union, paying close attention to the place of
slavery, Native dispossession, sexuality, and politics during the years 1787‐1840. Throughout the course we
will examine the ways in which the politics and protests of the early Republic continue to shape the current
United States. 6 credits; HI, IDS, QRE; Spring; Serena R Zabin
HIST 214 Sport and the Color Line Throughout the twentieth century, African Americans have broken racial
barriers, confronted racial stereotypes, and garnered unprecedented success in sport. In this course,
students will explore the relationship of the black athlete to the color line. We will complicate the historical
view of sport as a site of professional advancement and race reform by demonstrating how societal racial
practices were reconstructed within athletics. In essence, this course will emphasize the role sport
performed in structuring racial exclusion as athletic arenas—like movie theaters, railroads, schools, and
other public sites—shaped what Historian Grace Elizabeth Hale has termed the “culture of segregation.”
Though our primary focus will be on the experiences African Americans encountered, we will also probe the
color line beyond its typical black‐white binary. Thus, we will examine the achievements and altercations
that other ethnic and racial groups realized in their transnational push for equality and inclusion. 6 credits;
HI, IDS, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 215 Carleton in the Archives: Carleton in China What stories do pictures and voices tell? What roles did
Carletonians play in the making of twentieth century China during WWII, the Chinese Civil War, and the
Communist revolution? What are the reflux effects of select Carls’ experiences in China under

221
transformation? How do Carls project their voices and images to their audiences? The Gould Library
Archives Carleton‐in‐China Collection consists of photographs, film footage, field reports, interviews, and
public lectures. Students will be introduced to a wide range of visual and aural methods to help complete a
research paper based on their archival work by the end of the term. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IS; Not offered
2022‐23
HIST 218 Black Women's History This course focuses on the history of black women in the United States.
The class will offer an overview of the lived experiences of women of African descent in this country from
enslavement to the present. We will focus on themes of labor, reproduction, health, community, family,
resistance, activism, etc., highlighting the diversity of black women’s experiences and the ways in which
their lives have been shaped by the intersections of their race, gender, sexuality, and class. 6 credits; HI,
IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 219 Black Revolutions in the Atlantic World The development of the modern world through the lens of
Black revolutions is the analytical focus of this class. This course challenges eurocentric narratives of the
development of the modern world and instead centers critiques of western civilization from what Cedric
Robinson calls the Black Radical tradition and its liberatory project. Black resistance to the development of
the Americas and the system of racial capitalism was continuous and evolved over time. Using a series of
Black revolutions in the Atlantic World during the age of slavery as case studies, we will study historical
manifestations of Black radicalism and use them to theorize new forms of knowledge, history, philosophy,
and culture. 6 credits; HI, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 220 From Blackface to Blaxploitation: Black History and/in Film This course focuses on the
representation of African American history in popular US‐American movies. It will introduce students to the
field of visual history, using cinema as a primary source. Through films from the twentieth and twenty‐first
centuries, the seminar will analyze African American history, (pop‐)cultural depictions, and memory culture.
We will discuss subjects, narrative arcs, stylistic choices, production design, performative and film industry
practices, and historical receptions of movies. The topics include slavery, racial segregation and white
supremacy, the Black Freedom Movement, controversies and conflicts in Black communities, Black
LGBTQIA+ history, ghettoization and police brutality, Black feminism, and Afrofuturism. 6 credits; HI, WR2,
IDS; Winter; Rebecca J Brueckmann
HIST 221 Nat Turner, Booker T. Washington, and Fannie Lou Hamer in History and Memory This seminar
explores history and memory as valuable lens to investigate constructions of competing narratives about
three figures who loom large in our minds and imagination. Nat Turner, an extraordinary man inspired by
religious visions, led what many historians consider to be the most significant slave rebellion in American
history in 1831. Booker T. Washington’s ideas about racial uplift dominated African American life in the last
decade of the nineteenth century and the first decade of the twentieth century. Fannie Lou Hamer
emerged from Mississippi sharecropper society to toil for voting rights and economic empowerment
throughout the 1960s and 1970s. 6 credits; HI, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 223 The Presidents and their Slaves This course analyzes slavery, often referred to as the peculiar
institution, through its most peculiar lens: the involvement in chattel slavery by the founding fathers and
the federal government. We will explore the troubled history of our nation’s founding fathers who, on the
one hand, promoted democracy and liberty, and who, on the other hand, owned slaves. We will study the
lives of Sally Hemings, Paul Jennings, Ona Judge and other slaves owned by Presidents and will probe how
the White House emerged as a quasi‐plantation built on the labor of enslaved people. Further, we will
examine the federal government’s legacy in perpetuating and protecting slavery, scrutinizing the

222
Constitution, Fugitive Slave Act and other legislative actions that safeguarded the institution. 6 credits; HI,
WR2, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 225 James Baldwin and Black Lives Matter This seminar is an inquiry into James Baldwin’s rich political
and cultural thought that animates racial justice demands that take shape under conditions of domination.
Armed with critical tools from history, but also cultural studies and queer theory, we seek to understand
connections between the civil rights/black power era in the 1950s and ‘60s and the Black Lives Matter
movement of our time. Baldwin is an exemplar of critical conversations about black death by police in
Cleveland, Chicago, Ferguson, and the Twin Cities and the disentanglement between Martin Luther King’s
dream and the American Dream. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 226 U.S. Consumer Culture In the period after 1880, the growth of a mass consumer society recast
issues of identity, gender, race, class, family, and political life. We will explore the development of
consumer culture through such topics as advertising and mass media, the body and sexuality, consumerist
politics in the labor movement, and the response to the Americanization of consumption abroad. We will
read contemporary critics such as Thorstein Veblen, as well as historians engaged in weighing the
possibilities of abundance against the growth of corporate power. 6 credits; HI, IDS, WR2; Fall; Annette R
Igra
HIST 228 Civil Rights and Black Power This course treats the struggle for racial justice from World War II
through the 1960s. Histories, journalism, music, and visual media illustrate black and white elites and
grassroots people allied in this momentous epoch that ranges from a southern integrationist vision to
northern Black Power militancy. The segregationist response to black freedom completes the study. 6
credits; HI, WR2, IDS; Fall; Rebecca J Brueckmann
HIST 229 Working with Gender in U.S. History Historically work has been a central location for the
constitution of gender identities for both men and women; at the same time, cultural notions of gender
have shaped the labor market. We will investigate the roles of race, class, and ethnicity in shaping multiple
sexual divisions of labor and the ways in which terms such as skill, bread‐winning and work itself were
gendered. Topics will include domestic labor, slavery, industrialization, labor market segmentation,
protective legislation, and the labor movement. 6 credits; HI, IDS; Spring; Annette R Igra
HIST 230 Black Americans and the U.S. Civil War and Reconstruction What does a most turbulent period in
U.S. history look like from the perspectives of Black women and men? What role did Black thought and
resistance play in shaping the outcome of the war? What was interracial democracy during Reconstruction
and why was it ultimately overthrown? These are a few of the myriad questions we will seek to answer by
studying the central role of Black Americans in the Civil War and Reconstruction eras. We will examine how
Black people participated in and shaped the politics of this period and we will critically engage the
meanings of freedom, emancipation, and democracy. 6 credits; HI, IDS; Spring; Rebecca J Brueckmann
HIST 231 Mapping the World Before Mercator This course will explore early maps primarily in medieval and
early modern Europe. After an introduction to the rhetoric of maps and world cartography, we will examine
the functions and forms of medieval European and Islamic maps and then look closely at the continuities
and transformations in map‐making during the period of European exploration. The focus of the course will
be on understanding each map within its own cultural context and how maps can be used to answer
historical questions. We will work closely with the maps in Gould Library Special Collections to expand
campus awareness of the collection. 6 credits; HI, WR2, QRE, IS; Winter; Victoria Morse
HIST 232 Renaissance Worlds in France and Italy Enthusiasm, artistry, invention, exploration.... How do
these notions of Renaissance culture play out in sources from the period? Using a range of evidence

223
(historical, literary, and visual) from Italy and France in the fourteenth‐sixteenth centuries we will explore
selected issues of the period, including debates about the meaning of being human and ideal forms of
government and education; the nature of God and mankind's duties toward the divine; the family and
gender roles; definitions of beauty and the goals of artistic achievement; accumulation of wealth; and
exploration of new worlds and encounters with other peoples. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 233 The Byzantine World and Its Neighbors, 750‐ca. 1453 The Byzantine world (eighth‐fifteenth
centuries) was a zone of fascinating tensions, exchanges, and encounters. Through a wide variety of written
and visual evidence, we will examine key features of its history and culture: the nature of government;
piety and religious controversy; art and music; the evolving relations with the Latin West, Armenia, the
Slavic North and West, and the Dar al‐Islam (the Abbasids and Seljuk and Ottoman Turks); gender;
economic life; and social relations. Extra time will be required for special events and a group project
(ecumenical council). 6 credits; HI, IS, WR2, QRE; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 238 The Viking World In the popular imagination, Vikings are horn‐helmeted, blood‐thirsty pirates who
raped and pillaged their way across medieval Europe. But the Norse did much more than loot, rape, and
pillage; they cowed kings and fought for emperors, explored uncharted waters and settled the North
Atlantic, and established new trade routes that revived European urban life. In this course, we will separate
fact from fiction by critically examining primary source documents alongside archaeological, linguistic and
place‐name evidence. Students will share their insights with each other and the world through two major
collaborative digital humanities projects over the course of the term. 6 credits; HI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 239 Hunger, Public Policy and Food Provision in History For the first four weeks, the course covers the
comparative history of famine, and will be led by internationally renowned economic historian Cormac
O’Grada, the 2020 Ott Family Lecturer in Economic History at Carleton College. We examine causes and
consequences (political, economic, demographic) and the historical memories of famines as well as case
studies from Imperial Britain, Bengal and Ireland. In the second half of term, the course broadens its focus
to examine the persistence of hunger and the nature of public policies related to food provision in
comparative historical contexts. 6 credits; SI, WR2, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 240 Tsars and Serfs, Cossacks and Revolutionaries: The Empire that was Russia Nicholas II, the last
Tsar‐Emperor of Russia, ruled over an empire that stretched from the Baltic to the Pacific. Territorial
expansion over three‐and‐a‐half centuries had brought under Russian rule a vast empire of immense
diversity. The empire's subjects spoke a myriad languages, belonged to numerous religious communities,
and related to the state in a wide variety of ways. Its artists produced some of the greatest literature and
music of the nineteenth century and it offered fertile ground for ideologies of both conservative
imperialism and radical revolution. This course surveys the panorama of this empire from its inception in
the sixteenth century to its demise in the flames of World War I. Among the key analytical questions
addressed are the following: How did the Russian Empire manage its diversity? How does Russia compare
with other colonial empires? What understandings of political order legitimized it and how were they
challenged? 6 credits; HI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 241 Russia through Wars and Revolutions The lands of the Russian empire underwent massive
transformations in the tumultuous decades that separated the accession of Nicholas II (1894) from the
death of Stalin (1953). This course will explore many of these changes, with special attention paid to the
social and political impact of wars (the Russo‐Japanese War, World War I, the Civil War, and the Great
Patriotic War) and revolutions (of 1905 and 1917), the ideological conflicts they engendered, and the
comparative historical context in which they transpired. 6 credits; HI, IS; Fall; Adeeb Khalid

224
HIST 242 Communism, Cold War, Collapse: Russia Since Stalin In this course we will explore the history of
Russia and other former Soviet states in the period after the death of Stalin, exploring the workings of the
communist system and the challenges it faced internally and internationally. We will investigate the nature
of the late Soviet state and look at the different trajectories Russia and other post‐Soviet states have
followed since the end of the Soviet Union. 6 credits; HI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 243 The Peasants are Revolting! Society and Politics in the Making of Modern France Political
propaganda of the French Revolutionary period tells a simple story of downtrodden peasants exploited by
callous nobles, but what exactly was the relationship between the political transformations of France from
the Renaissance through the French Revolution and the social, religious, and cultural tensions that
characterized the era? This course explores the connections and conflicts between popular and elite culture
as we survey French history from the sixteenth through early nineteenth centuries, making comparisons to
social and political developments in other European countries along the way. 6 credits; HI, IS, WR2, QRE;
Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 244 The Enlightenment and Its Legacies The Enlightenment: praised for its role in promoting human
rights, condemned for its role in underwriting colonialism; lauded for its cosmopolitanism, despised for its
Eurocentrism... how should we understand the cultural and intellectual history of the Enlightenment, and
what are its legacies? This course starts by examining essential Enlightenment texts by philosophes such as
Montesquieu, Voltaire, Diderot, and Rousseau, and then the second half of the term focuses on unpacking
the Enlightenment's entanglements with modern ideas around topics such as religion, race, sex, gender,
colonialism etc. 6 credits; NE, WR2, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 245 Ireland: Land, Conflict and Memory This course explores the history of Ireland from Medieval
times through the Great Famine, ending with a look at the Partition of Ireland in 1920. We examine themes
of religious and cultural conflict and explore a series of English political and military interventions.
Throughout the course, we will analyze views of the Irish landscape, landholding patterns, and health and
welfare issues. Finally, we explore the contested nature of history and memory as the class discusses
monuments and memory production in Irish public spaces. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IS, QRE; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 246 Making Early Medieval England This course explores the world of Early Medieval England from
Rome's decline through the Norman Conquest (c.400‐1066) through its material culture. These six centuries
witnessed dramatic transformations, including waning Roman influence, changing environmental
conditions, ethnic migrations, the coming of Christianity, the rise of kingdoms, and the emergence of new
agricultural and economic regimes. We will look beyond the kings and priests at the top of society by
analyzing objects people made and used, buildings they built, and human remains they buried alongside
primary and secondary written sources. Students will practice writing history from, and experiment with
(re)making, early English "things"" 6 credits; HI, IS; Fall; Austin P Mason
HIST 249 Two Centuries of Tumult: Modern Central Europe An examination of the political, social, and
cultural history of Central Europe from 1848 to the present day. We will explore the evolution of state and
civil society in the multicultural/multinational regions of the present‐day Czech Republic, Slovakia, Poland,
Hungary, as well as eastern Germany and Austria. Much of the course will focus on the common
experiences of authoritarianism, anti‐Semitism, fascism/Nazism, and especially the Communist era and its
dissolution. 6 credits; HI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 250 Modern Germany This course offers a comprehensive examination of German history in the
nineteenth and twentieth centuries. We will look at the German‐speaking peoples of Central Europe
through the prism of politics, society, culture, and the economy. Through a range of readings, we will

225
grapple with the many complex and contentious issues that have made German history such an interesting
area of intellectual inquiry. 6 credits; HI, IS; Winter; David G Tompkins
HIST 252 Fascism in Europe, 1919‐1945 This course examines the history and historiography of European
fascism from its origins through World War II, looking at national case studies including Italy, Germany,
Spain, and France. Adopting a comparative perspective and offering conflicting historical interpretations,
the course explores the differences between fascism and right‐wing authoritarian movements, the fascist
style(s) of rule, and fascism's ideological make‐up. The course also covers the way fascists seized power,
consolidated their rule through apparatuses of terror, won adherents through foreign and domestic
policies, and manufactured consent through propaganda, cultural initiatives, and mass participatory
politics. 6 credits; HI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 254 Colonialism in East Asia This course explores the colonialisms in East Asia, both internal and
external. Students examine Chinese, Inner Asian, Japanese, and European colonialisms from the
seventeenth century to the present. Geographically, students cover borderlands of East Asian empires
(Tibet, Xinjiang, Mongolia, Manchuria, Fujian, Yunnan, Canton, Vietnam, Taiwan, Korea, Okinawa, and
Hokkaido). Methodologically, students eschew power‐politics and historical studies of "frontier" regions in
order to analyze everyday aspects of colonial arrangements and communities in different historical
moments from the bottom up. Topics include ethnic identities, racial discourses, colonial settlements,
opium regimes, violence and memory (e.g. Nanjing massacre), and forced labor migrations (e.g. comfort
women). 6 credits; HI, IS, WR2; Spring; Seungjoo Yoon
HIST 255 Rumors, Gossip, and News in East Asia What is news? How do rumors and gossip shape news in
modern China, Japan, and Korea? Is the press one of the sociocultural bases within civil society that shapes
opinion in the public sphere in East Asia? Students will examine how press‐like activities reshape oral
communication networks and printing culture and isolate how the public is redefined in times of war and
revolutions. Drawing sources from a combination of poems, private letters, maps, pamphlets, handbills,
local gazetteers, rumor mills, pictorials, and cartoons, students will map communication circuits that linked
authors, journalists, shippers, booksellers, itinerant storytellers, gossipers, listeners, and active readers. 6
credits; HI, IS, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 256 Disaster, Disease, & Rumors in East Asia How are rumors generated and transmitted in a period of
high anxiety like disaster? Do rumors and anxiety reciprocate? How do rumors enhance existing stereotypes
and prejudices of people? Why do rumors arise in a society that suffers from inadequate information or the
complete cutoff in communication? This course classifies the types and nature of rumors at the time of
making modern East Asia. Thematically, it examines the interplay between wartime science, environmental
conditions, and societal capacities in modern Japan, Korea, and China. Topics include rumor panics
generated by epidemic, water pollution, atomic bomb, famine politics, industrial toxins, and lab leaks. 6
credits; HI, WR2, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 257 Chinese Capitalism: From Local to Global How did China become a global player in the market
economy? This course surveys Chinese business history in the recent past focusing on the origins of
industrial development in China, agrarian “involution” and famine, vernacular commercialism, and
arguments about China’s economic divergence from and convergence with the rest of the world. Historical
examples are drawn from enterprises that produced salt, medicine, cotton textile, machine tools,
electricity, automobiles, and the iPhone. Students will pick one of them and write a historical biography of a
businessperson, an economic thinker, a company, or an entrepreneurial activity (e.g., operating
department stores or advertising companies). 6 credits; HI, QRE, IS, WR2; Fall; Seungjoo Yoon

226
HIST 258 Korean History in Films & Testimonies What are the limits and promises of putting history on
screen, and vice versa? What would be a better way to convey the sentiments of a human being who must
make a moral choice in a distinctive historical circumstance? This course explores the dynamic relationship
between testimony‐giving and filmmaking about the lived experience in Korea in the recent past. We will
focus on the voices of ordinary people, especially those shaped by female and downtrodden citizens.
Drawing examples from films, diaries, memoirs, autobiographies, eyewitnesses, and/or novels, students will
analyze an enduring value orientation of a historical figure of their choice. 6 credits; NE, IS; Winter;
Seungjoo Yoon
HIST 260 The Making of the Modern Middle East A survey of major political and social developments from
the fifteenth century to the beginning of World War I. Topics include: state and society, the military and
bureaucracy, religious minorities (Jews and Christians), and women in premodern Muslim societies; the
encounter with modernity. 6 credits; HI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 263 Plagues of Empire The globalization of disease is often seen as a recent phenomenon aided by
high‐speed communication and travel. This course examines the history of the spread of infectious diseases
by exploring the connection between disease, medicine and European imperial expansion. We consider the
ways in which European expansion from 1500 onwards changed the disease landscape of the world and
how pre‐existing diseases in the tropics shaped and thwarted imperial ambitions. We will also question how
far Western medicine can be seen as a benefit by examining its role in facilitating colonial expansion and
constructing racial and gender difference. 6 credits; HI, IS; Spring; Amna Khalid
HIST 265 Central Asia in the Modern Age Central Asia‐‐the region encompassing the post‐Soviet states of
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan, and the Xinjiang region of the People's
Republic of China‐‐is often considered one of the most exotic in the world, but it has experienced all the
excesses of the modern age. After a basic introduction to the long‐term history of the steppe, this course
will concentrate on exploring the history of the region since its conquest by the Russian and Chinese
empires. We will discuss the interaction of external and local forces as we explore transformations in the
realms of politics, society, culture, and religion. 6 credits; HI, IS; Fall; Adeeb Khalid
HIST 266 History of Islam in South Asia While Islam in popular thought is often associated solely with the
Arab world, in reality eighty percent of the world’s Muslim population is not of Arab ethnicity. The
countries of South Asia‐‐particularly India, Pakistan and Bangladesh‐‐are collectively home to the largest
number of Muslims. After examining the early background of the appearance and growth of Islamic
societies and governments, we will explore the rich history of the expansion of Islam into the Indian
subcontinent. We will take account of the role of trade and conquest in the early centuries of Islamic
expansion and study the development of specifically Indian forms of Islam. The nature and impact of the
Indo‐Islamic empires will receive our attention, as will the interaction of Muslims with non‐Muslim
communities in medieval and early modern India. This will be followed by a look at the period of colonial
rule, and an analysis of the specific historical contexts that gave rise to specific religious nationalist
movements. We will then trace out how, once established, these movements developed according to their
changing relationships to national liberation movements, secularism, state administrative systems, global
economic shifts, and changing social demands. 6 credits; HI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 268 Globalization & Local Responses in India Program: History, Globalization, and Politics in Modern
India Indian democracy presents a complicated social and political terrain that is being reshaped and
remapped by a wide variety of efforts to bring about economic development, social change, political
representation, justice, and equality. In this course we will examine, among other topics, the history of
modern India with a focus on political movements centered on issues of colonialism, nationalism, class,

227
gender, and caste. We will also examine changes in contemporary India brought about by globalization, and
study how particular groups and communities have reacted and adapted to these developments.
Prerequisite: Acceptance into the India OCS Program required. 6 credits; HI, IS; Winter; Brendan P LaRocque
HIST 269 Religion, Race & Caste in Modern India This course will examine the history of religious beliefs,
practices, and community, European imperialist and Orientalist ideologies, and the socio‐political
implications of anti‐colonial nationalist movements in India. We will address questions including: How did
the European powers justify their imperial undertaking through specific concepts of race, religion, science
and technology? How did the imperial experience impact Christianity, Islam, and Hinduism, and caste, race,
and gender in India? In the post‐colonial period we will examine the powerful growth of low‐caste and
anti‐caste social movements and political parties, as well as religious nationalist, pluralist, and secular mass‐
movements. 6 credits; NE, IDS; Spring; Brendan P LaRocque
HIST 270 Nuclear Nations: India and Pakistan as Rival Siblings At the stroke of midnight on August 15, 1947
India and Pakistan, two new nation states emerged from the shadow of British colonialism. This course
focuses on the political trajectories of these two rival siblings and looks at the ways in which both states use
the other to forge antagonistic and belligerent nations. While this is a survey course it is not a
comprehensive overview of the history of the two countries. Instead it covers some of the more significant
moments of rupture and violence in the political history of the two states. The first two‐thirds of the course
offers a top‐down, macro overview of these events and processes whereas the last third examines the ways
in which people experienced these developments. We use the lens of gender to see how the physical body,
especially the body of the woman, is central to the process of nation building. We will consider how
women’s bodies become sites of contestation and how they are disciplined and policed by the postcolonial
state(s). 6 credits; HI, IS, WR2; Spring; Amna Khalid
HIST 272 Music and Movement in Atlantic World History This course examines music and movement in
Atlantic World history and introduces methods from the digital humanities. It analyzes how hybrid cultural
practices began in the period of colonization and the transatlantic slave system. It considers how these
practices influenced national identities during the nineteenth century and continued to cross between the
Americas, Africa, and Europe in the twentieth and twenty‐first centuries. The course addresses broad
themes including immigration, race, class, nationalism, and transnational exchange. A digital humanities
approach enables the course to ask and answer new questions about these topics. No previous experience
with digital humanities is required. 6 credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 275 Latin American Immigration to the US Immigration from Latin America has historically been, and
continues to be, a topic of concern and controversy in the United States. This course seeks to provide a
clear and informed understanding of the phenomenon. It surveys various migration waves from Mexico,
Central America and the Caribbean, and South America. Through a variety of audio‐visual sources,
scholarship, testimonies/memoirs, and other materials, students will examine the political and economic
factors that pushed people out of their countries and pulled them into the United States; the
migrants' perilous journey to the north; and the everyday life of these migrants once they are in the U.S. 6
credits; HI, IDS; Spring; Pedro F Quijada
HIST 279 Central American Revolutions Throughout the 1970s and 1980s, civil war and political violence
swept the Central American isthmus. The impact of these conflicts is still felt in the region as well as in the
United States. This course examines the regional as well as the international factors that contributed to the
rise of these armed conflicts. Through the examination of print and audio‐visual primary sources as well as
scholarship students will learn about the origins, development, and legacies of these revolutions. We will
examine the colonial legacies, capitalist development, ethnic and racial conflict, foreign intervention, civil

228
wars, and, finally, the consequential waves of migration to the U.S. and to other parts of the world. 6
credits; HI, IS; Winter; Pedro F Quijada
HIST 281 War in Modern Africa This course examines the causes, features, and consequences of wars across
two critical phases of African history, colonial and post‐colonial. It covers four cases studies from modern
Central, East, and West Africa: the Congo (first under the rule of King Leopold and later the Belgian colonial
government), Tanganyika (under German colonial rule), Nigeria (during the first republic through the
civil war), and Uganda (under the rule of Idi Amin). Students will learn how certain memories or
interpretations of events are narrated, fashioned, truncated, contested, forgotten, or silenced. Students
also will learn how different historical actors participated in and experienced war. 6 credits; HI, IS; Not
offered 2022‐23
HIST 282 African Diaspora in Arabia This course offers a broad historical overview of African men's and
women's experiences as religious, political, and military leaders, as merchants and poets, and in agricultural
and maritime industries in Arabia. Situated primarily in Bahrain, with travel to Oman, the course will
examine long standing historical, cultural, and commercial exchanges between Africa and the Gulf from
medieval times to the present day. The course will question the ideologies that assume that Africa and
Arabia represent racial and cultural difference. Prerequisite: 100 or 200 level Africana Studies or History
course and participation on OCS program. 6 credits; HI, IS, WR2, QRE; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 284 History, Culture and Commerce Program: Heritage in Africa and Arabia Through lectures, readings,
and extensive site visits to museums and archaeological sites, this course examines the rich cultural
heritage of East Africa and Arabia. Students will investigate Persian, Arab, Indian, and Islamic sites in
Zanzibar, Oman, and Bahrain, reflecting on the deep influence of the Indian Ocean on the region’s historical
trading systems and modern‐day relations. The course also examines the influence of various European
colonial powers during the era in which they ruled or wielded influence. Prerequisite: 100 or 200 level
Africana Studies or History course and participation on OCS program. 6 credits; HI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 285 History, Culture and Commerce Program: Critical Historical Research This course focuses on
ethnographic research and writing with an emphasis on the practice of fieldwork. Students will conduct
group research projects that include actively guiding and evaluating the work of their peers. The content of
these projects will include maritime activities, health, music, economics, and heritage. Students will learn
the benefits and challenges of examining oral tradition, oral history, poetry, visual art, material culture, and
embodied practice. Service or experiential learning is another major point of emphasis. Students will
develop their ability to question their knowledge, method, evidence, interpretation, experience, ethics, and
power. Prerequisite: 100 or 200 level Africana Studies or History course and participation on OCS program.
6 credits; HI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 287 From Alchemy to the Atom Bomb: The Scientific Revolution and the Making of the Modern World
This course examines the growth of modern science since the Renaissance with an emphasis on the
Scientific Revolution, the development of scientific methodology, and the emergence of new scientific
disciplines. How might a history of science focused on scientific networks operating within society, rather
than on individual scientists, change our understanding of “genius,” “progress,” and “scientific
impartiality?” We will consider a range of scientific developments, treating science both as a body of
knowledge and as a set of practices, and will gauge the extent to which our knowledge of the natural world
is tied to who, when, and where such knowledge has been produced and circulated. 6 credits; HI, WR2;
Spring; Antony E Adler

229
HIST 288 Reason, Authority, and Love in Medieval France In a series of letters written after the abrupt and
violent ending of their sexual relationship, Peter Abelard, a controversial and creative teacher and
philosopher, and Heloise, a respected abbess and thinker, explored central questions about the nature of
gender roles, love, authority, and the place of reason in human affairs. In other works, Abelard articulated
new approaches to ethical judgment (the primacy of intention), the status of universals, and the potential
of logical argument to foster interreligious dialogue. Through their use of dialectic, his works modeled
new approaches to metaphysics, ontology, anthropology, and the nature and use of authorities. Through
close reading and discussion of these works and those of select contemporaries, this course will explore the
key philosophical, social, and institutional dynamics of a moment of profound change in medieval thought
and culture. 3 credits; HI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 289 Gender and Ethics in Late Medieval France Acknowledged by contemporaries as one of the
leading intellects of her time, Christine de Pizan (ca. 1364‐ca. 1431) became an author of unusual literary
range, personal resilience, and perceptiveness in a time of ongoing warfare, civil strife, and intellectual
ferment. In addition to composing romances, poetry, quasi‐autobiographical works, royal biography, and
political theory, she became an articulate critic of the patriarchy and misogyny of her world, contemporary
patterns and cultures of violence, and a critical voice in defense of female capability. Using Christine's
writings together with other contemporary voices, we will examine how contemporaries confronted
fundamental questions of identity, status, violence, ethics, and love in domestic and public spheres in late
medieval France. 6 credits; HI, IS, WR2; Winter; William L North
HIST 298 Junior Colloquium In the junior year, majors must take this six‐credit reading and discussion
course taught each year by different members of the department faculty. The course is also required for
the History minor. The general purpose of History 298 is to help students reach a more sophisticated
understanding of the nature of history as a discipline and of the approaches and methods of historians. A
major who is considering off‐campus study in the junior year should consult with their adviser on when to
take History 298. Prerequisite: At least two six credit courses in History (excluding HIST 100 and
Independents) at Carleton. 6 credits; HI; Fall, Winter, Spring; Amna Khalid, Adeeb Khalid
HIST 301 Indigenous Histories at Carleton Carleton's new campus land acknowledgement affirms that this is
Dakota land, but how did Carleton come to be here? What are the histories of Indigenous faculty, students,
and staff at Carleton? In this course, students;will investigate Indigenous histories on our campus by
conducting original research about how Carleton acquired its landbase, its historic relationships to Dakota
and Anishinaabeg people, histories of on‐campus activism, the shifting demographics of Native students on
campus, and the histories of;Indigenous faculty and staff, among others. Students will situate these
histories within the broader context of federal Indian policies and Indigenous resistance. 6 credits; NE,
WR2, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 304 Black Study and the University This course examines the historical relationship between Black
intellectuals and the university. We will examine the juxtaposition between institutionalized white
supremacy in universities and the work of Black students and faculty as well as the radical implications of
Black knowledge production. Beginning with the writings of Anna Julia Cooper and W.E.B. Du Bois, the
course traces how Black intellectuals have conceptualized the political utility of higher education and its
liberatory potential over the course of the twentieth century. Emphases include the significance of
Historically Black Colleges and Universities, the advent of Black Studies departments, and the role of Black
Studies today and in the future. 6 credits; HI, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 306 American Wilderness To many Americans, wild lands are among the nation’s most treasured
places. Yellowstone, Yosemite, Mount Rainier, Joshua Tree, Grand Canyon – the names alone stir the heart,

230
the mind, and the imagination. But where do those thoughts and feelings come from, and how have they
both reflected and shaped American culture, society, and nature over the last three centuries? These are
the central issues and questions that we will pursue in this seminar and in its companion course, ENTS 307
Wilderness Field Studies: Grand Canyon (which includes an Off‐Campus Studies program at Grand Canyon
National Park). Prerequisite: Acceptance in Wilderness Studies at the Grand Canyon OCS program. History
205 is recommended but not required. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 308 American Cities and Nature Since the nation's founding, the percentage of Americans living in
cities has risen nearly sixteenfold, from about five percent to the current eighty‐one percent. This massive
change has spawned legions of others, and all of them have bearing on the complex ways that American
cities and city‐dwellers have shaped and reshaped the natural world. This course will consider the nature of
cities in American history, giving particular attention to the dynamic linkages binding these cultural
epicenters to ecological communities, environmental forces and resource flows, to eco‐politics and social
values, and to those seemingly far‐away places we call farms and wilderness. Prerequisite: History 205 is
recommended but not required. 6 credits; WR2, IDS, HI; Winter; George H Vrtis
HIST 315 America's Founding This course is part of an off‐campus winter break program that includes two
linked courses in the fall and winter. The creation and establishment of the United States was a contested
and uncertain event stretched over more than half a century. For whom, for what, and how was the United
States created? In what ways do the conflicts and contradictions of the nation’s eighteenth‐century
founding shape today’s America? We will examine how the nation originated in violent civil war and in
political documents that simultaneously offered glorious promises and a “covenant with death.” Our
nuanced understanding of the American Revolution and Early Republic will underpin our ability to tell these
stories to the wider public. Prerequisite: One previous history course. 6 credits; HI, IDS; Not offered 2022‐
23
HIST 316 Presenting America's Founding This course is the second half of a two‐course sequence focused on
the study of the founding of the United States in American public life. The course will begin with a two‐
week off‐campus study program during winter break in Washington, D.C and Boston, where we will visit
world‐class museums and historical societies, meet with museum professionals, and learn about the goals
and challenges of history museums, the secrets to successful exhibitions, and the work of museum curators
and directors. The course will culminate in the winter term with the completion of an exhibit created in
conjunction with one of the museums located on Boston’s Freedom Trail. Prerequisite: History 315. 6
credits; HI, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 320 The Progressive Era? Was the Progressive Era progressive? It was a period of social reform, labor
activism, and woman suffrage, but also of Jim Crow, corporate capitalism, and U.S. imperialism. These are
among the topics that can be explored in research papers on this contradictory era. We will begin by
reading a brief text that surveys the major subject areas and relevant historiography of the period. The
course will center on the writing of a 25‐30 page based on primary research, which will be read and
critiqued by members of the seminar. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IDS; Fall; Annette R Igra
HIST 331 Regional States: Boundaries and Horizons in Fourteenth‐century Italy We will examine the
development of regional states in fourteenth‐century Italy. We will explore the social, religious, political,
environmental, and cultural aspects of a changing world between the medieval and the modern. The Black
Death, a triad of literary greats (Dante, Petrarch, and Boccaccio), maps, humanism, political theory, water
rights, saints, business, and travelers to and from Italy are some of the themes we will engage with as we
try to understand how contemporaries conceptualized the political, spatial, and cultural boundaries of their

231
world. Students will conduct original research relating to the seminar topics culminating in a substantial
research paper. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 332 Image Makers and Breakers in the Premodern World What roles do images play in premodern
societies? What are these images thought to be and to do? Why, at particular moments, have certain
groups attempted to do away with images either completely or in specific settings? How do images create
and threaten communities and how is the management of the visual integrated with and shaped by other
values, structures, and objectives? This course will examine these and related questions by looking in depth
at image‐making and veneration and their opponents in a range of case studies (from the medieval west,
Byzantium, Muslim lands, and Protestant Europe) and by examining theoretical discussions of images,
vision, and cognition from the fourth through sixteenth centuries. This course is discussion intensive and
each student will develop a research project on a topic of their own design. Prerequisite: Previous history
course or instructor consent. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 338 Digital History, Public Heritage & Deep Mapping How do new methods of digital humanities and
collaborative public history change our understanding of space and place? This hands‐on research seminar
will seek answers through a deep mapping of the long history of Northfield, Minnesota, before and after its
most well‐known era of the late nineteenth‐century. Deep mapping is as much archaeology as it is
cartography, plumbing the depths of a particular place to explore its diversity through time. Students will
be introduced to major theories of space and place as well as their application through technologies such as
Geographic Information Systems (GIS), 3D modeling, and video game engines. We will mount a major
research project working with the National Register of Historic Places, in collaboration with specialists in
public history and community partners. 6 credits; HI, QRE, IDS; Spring; Austin P Mason
HIST 341 The Russian Revolution and its Global Legacies The Russian revolution of 1917 was one of the
seminal events of the twentieth century. It transformed much beyond Russia itself. This course will take
stock of the event and its legacy. What was the Russian revolution? What was its place in the history of
revolutions? How did it impact the world? How was it seen by those who made it and those who witnessed
it? How have these evaluations changed over time? What sense can we make of it in the year of its
centenary? The revolution was both an inspiration (to many revolutionary and national‐liberation
movements) and used as a tale of caution and admonition (by adversaries of the Soviet Union). The
readings will put the Russian revolution in the broadest perspective of the twentieth century and its
contested evaluations, from within the Soviet Union and beyond, from its immediate aftermath, through
World War II, the Cold War, to the post‐Soviet period. The course is aimed at all students interested in the
history of the twentieth century and of the idea of the revolution. Prerequisite: One course in Modern
European History or instructor consent. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 346 The Holocaust This course will grapple with the difficult and complicated phenomenon of the
genocide of the Jews of Europe. We will explore anti‐Semitism in its historical context, both in the German‐
speaking lands as well as in Europe as a whole. The experience of Jews in Nazi Germany will be an area of
focus, but this class will look at European Jews more broadly, both before and during the Second World
War. The question of responsibility and guilt will be applied to Germans as well as to other European
societies, and an exploration of victims will extend to other affected groups. 6 credits; HI, IS; Spring; David G
Tompkins
HIST 347 The Global Cold War In the aftermath of the Second World War and through the 1980s, the United
States and the Soviet Union competed for world dominance. This Cold War spawned hot wars, as well as a
cultural and economic struggle for influence all over the globe. This course will look at the experience of the
Cold War from the perspective of its two main adversaries, the U.S. and USSR, but will also devote

232
considerable attention to South America, Asia, Africa, and the Middle East. Students will write a 20 page
paper based on original research. 6 credits; HI, IS, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 360 Muslims and Modernity Through readings in primary sources in translation, we will discuss the
major intellectual and cultural movements that have influenced Muslim thinkers from the nineteenth
century on. Topics include modernism, nationalism, socialism, and fundamentalism. Prerequisite: At least
one prior course in the history of the Middle East or Central Asia or Islam. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IS; Winter;
Adeeb Khalid
HIST 382 Slavery & Abolition in Africa and its Diaspora What is slavery? What is its historical relationship to
other forms of bondage, labor, or debt? This course explores the complex, evolving, and wide‐ranging
meanings of slavery in Africa and its diaspora. Students will juxtapose a number of case studies: early versus
modern Islamic communities in Arabia, sixteenth‐ versus nineteenth‐century Ottoman regimes, eighteenth‐
century Catholic Kongo versus nineteenth‐century Anglican Nigeria, and Egypt under nineteenth‐
century Ottoman rule versus twentieth‐century British rule. It draws from religious texts, nineteenth‐
century missionary documents, and twentieth‐century manumission records. How does slavery become
associated with Africa? The nineteenth century offers many clues. Prerequisite: Prior History or Africana
Studies course. 6 credits; HI, WR2, QRE, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
HIST 383 Africa's Colonial Legacies This course deepens understanding of the causes, manifestations, and
implications of warfare in modern Africa by highlighting African perspectives on colonialism's legacies.
Drawing from cases in South Africa, Uganda, Kenya, Algeria, and Sudan, the course questions whether
Britain's policy of indirect rule, France's direct rule, and South Africa's apartheid rule were variants of
despotism and how colonial rule shaped possibilities of resistance, reform, and repression. Students also
will learn how different historical actors participated in and experienced war as well as produce an original
research paper that thoughtfully uses primary and secondary resources. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IS; Not offered
2022‐23
HIST 398 Advanced Historical Writing This course is designed to support majors in developing advanced
skills in historical research and writing. Through a combination of class discussion, small group work, and
one‐on‐one interactions with the professor, majors learn the process of constructing sophisticated, well‐
documented, and well‐written historical arguments within the context of an extended project of their own
design. They also learn and practice strategies for engaging critically with contemporary scholarship and
effective techniques of peer review and the oral presentation of research. Concurrent enrollment in History
400 required. By permission of the instructor only. 6 credits; S/CR/NC; HI, WR2; Winter; Annette R Igra
HIST 400 Integrative Exercise Required of all seniors majoring in history. Registration in this course is
contingent upon prior approval of a research proposal. 6 credits; S/NC; Fall, Winter, Spring

Interdisciplinary Studies
IDSC 099 Carleton Undergraduate Bridge Experience The Carleton Undergraduate Bridge Experience is a six‐
week program designed to review quantitative skills and explore how these quantitative skills are relevant
to disciplines ranging from biology and physics to economics and psychology. Topics may include functions
(linear, exponential, logarithmic), geometry, trigonometry, and analysis and graphical representation of
data sets. Students will work in teams on several activities, including exploring Carleton‐specific data sets
that can be used tell a story about the College and collaborating on problems that explore how particular

233
quantitative skills are used in the sciences and social sciences. In addition, students review and practice
their quantitative skills through self‐paced work. 5 credits; S/CR/NC; NE; Summer; Lin S Winton
IDSC 099 Summer Humanities Program In this course, we will explore how key historic figures understood
the connection between knowledge, power, and identity and the ways in which they sought to help their
contemporaries perceive and cope with uncertainty, deception, and controversial truths. Throughout this
course students choosing history as their primary field will pursue individual curated research projects that
will culminate in a research essay and a public presentation based on this research. 6 credits; S/CR/NC;
Summer; William L North
IDSC 100 Civil Discourse in a Troubled Age As we listen to people discussing critical issues facing individuals,
communities, countries and the planet, what do we see happening? Is communication occurring? Do the
sides hear each other and seek to understand another point of view, even if in disagreement? Is the goal
truth or the best policy or victory for a side? What skills, approaches, and conditions lead to genuine
discussion and productive argument? How can we cultivate these as individuals and communities? This
Argument and Inquiry seminar addresses these questions in both theory and practice by allowing students
the opportunity to read, view, discuss, and analyze theoretical discussions and case studies drawn from the
past and present on a range of controversial topics. 6 credits; AI, WR1; Fall; Lin S Winton, William L North,
Sindy L Fleming
IDSC 100 Data Visualization As Activism Data visualization (turning evidence into images) and activism have
a common goal: to make the invisible more visible. How can graphs be used for activist work? Through
discussion, reading, production, and reflection, this seminar will teach students how to read and think
critically about graphs, produce graphs for public audiences, and consider the ethical dimensions of data
access and representation. We will learn from data visualization pioneers such as W.E.B. Du Bois, who
combined graphs and photographs for the 1900 Paris World's Fair to tell a complex story of the agency,
sophistication, and oppression of African Americans in post‐emancipation America. As we discuss the role
of data viz in activism, we will learn to experiment with creating our own visual arguments; our final project
will be in partnership with a local community organization. No previous experience with statistics or
graphing software is necessary. 6 credits; AI, WR1, QRE; Fall; Lin S Winton
IDSC 100 Games and Gaming Cultures In this seminar, we will use games (both by studying them and by
playing them) as a lens through which we can explore all manner of fascinating questions. How do the
games we play shape our culture and our communities? What makes a game fun, engaging, addictive,
boring, brutal, or banal? How can games encourage certain kinds of behavior, even after we've stopped
playing them? Could we make Carleton itself a bit better‐‐or at least more fun‐‐if we gamified certain
aspects of life here? To aid our exploration, we’ll draw on readings from multiple genres and employ a
variety of research methods to analyze games from social, textual, and design perspectives. This course will
also include weekly lab sessions on Wednesday evenings (6:15‐8:30PM). Students will be required to
attend at least eight out of ten lab sessions. 6 credits; AI, WR1; Fall; George Cusack
IDSC 100 Let's Talk about Race!: Exploring Race in Higher Education From Starbucks' failed "Race together"
initiative to debates about Rachel Dolezal's racial identity to the Black Lives Matter movement, it is clear
that race still matters in America. These incidents also demonstrate the difficulties of having discussions
about race, especially across racial lines. Drawing on texts from multiple disciplines, this course will
examine the history of racial categories with a particular emphasis on how race matters in higher
education. This course will also incorporate readings and activities that will help students develop further
their skills to have productive discussions about race, especially in the context of a small residential
college. 6 credits; AI, WR1; Fall; Anita P Chikkatur

234
IDSC 103 Student Conversations about Diversity and Community In this course students participate in peer‐
led conversations about diversity and community at Carleton. Students complete readings and engage in
experiential exercises that invite them to reflect on their own social identities and their attitudes toward
race, gender, class, and sexuality. By taking risks and engaging in honest conversations and self‐reflection,
students work together to understand differences and to explore how to build communities that are
welcoming and open to diversity. Students keep a weekly journal and write two reflective essays that are
graded by faculty members. 2 credits; S/CR/NC; NE, IDS; Winter; Trey Williams
IDSC 110 Thinking with Numbers: Using Math and Data in Context This course will enhance students'
quantitative skills and provide opportunities to apply those skills to authentic problems. Topics covered will
vary depending on students in the class; possible topics include unit conversions, significant figures and
estimation, exponents, logarithms, algebra, geometry, probability, and statistics. We will explore how these
skills are relevant in contexts ranging from making personal finance decisions to understanding medical
research reports. Prerequisite: Interdisciplinary Studies 099, Undergraduate Bridge Experience. 1 credit;
S/CR/NC; NE; Fall; Lin S Winton
IDSC 141 Computer Science Program: Computing with Context: Alan Turing, Gender, and Computing This
course will address a cluster of topics related to a broad gender‐based context for computing. The starting
point is Alan Turing himself: a hero for his code‐breaking work during the war, Turing was also a gay man
chemically castrated by the British government who (likely) died by suicide after enduring that treatment.
The course will spiral outward from Turing to include a broader set of topics related to gender and sexuality
in computing, ranging from Turing's era to the present. Specific topics will vary based on the interests of
available experts in aspects of gender and computing. Prerequisite: Computer Science 201 and 202.
(Mathematics 236 will be accepted in lieu of Computer Science 202). 2 credits; S/CR/NC; NE; Summer;
David Liben‐Nowell
IDSC 150 Plague, War and Crisis: Reading Hobbes Reading Thucydides, Books 1‐2: Plague and Democracy
We will meet once a week to read and discuss Books 1 and 2 of Thucydides’ History of
the Peloponnesian War in Thomas Hobbes’s famed translation of 1628 (subsequent books will be discussed
in courses offered in the Winter and Spring terms). We will attend to the literary art and to the political and
social contexts of the original Greek, as well as to Hobbes’s recontextualization of it to the England of the
1620s. This bifocal approach may provoke insights into our current predicament. 2 credits; NE, IS; Not
offered 2022‐23
IDSC 151 Plague, War, Crisis: Reading Hobbes Reading Thucydides: Books 3‐5 Revolt and Revolution We will
meet once a week to read and discuss Books 3‐5 of Thucydides’ History of the Peloponnesian War in
Thomas Hobbes’s famed translation of 1628 (subsequent books will be discussed in the course offered in
the Spring term). We will attend to the literary art and to the political and social contexts of the original
Greek, as well as to Hobbes’s recontextualization of it to the England of the 1620s. This bifocal approach
may provoke insights into our current predicament. 2 credits; NE, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
IDSC 152 Plague, War, Crisis: Reading Hobbes Reading Thucydides: Books 6‐8 Catastrophe and Coup We will
meet once a week to read and discuss Books 6‐8 of Thucydides’ History of the Peloponnesian War in
Thomas Hobbes’s famed translation of 1628. We will attend to the literary art and to the political and social
contexts of the original Greek, as well as to Hobbes’s recontextualization of it to the England of the 1620s.
This bifocal approach may provoke insights into our current predicament. 2 credits; NE, IS; Not offered
2022‐23

235
IDSC 198 FOCUS Colloquium This colloquium is designed to give students participating in the Focusing on
Cultivating Scientists program an opportunity to learn and use skills in scientific study, reasoning, and
modeling. The topics of this project‐based colloquium will vary each term, and allow students to develop
competencies in areas relevant to multiple science disciplines. 2 credits; S/CR/NC; NE; Fall, Winter, Spring;
Mija M Van Der Wege
IDSC 202 MMUF Research Seminar This seminar develops the skills needed to engage in and communicate
advanced research. Each participant will work and present regularly on their ongoing research projects, and
participate actively in an ongoing series of workshops and conferences. The seminar will also discuss in
depth the nature of academia as institution and culture, and the role of diversity in the production of
knowledge and teaching in American higher education. Open only to students with MMUF fellow status.
Prerequisite: Participation in the Mellon Program/MMUF or MGSEF Program. 2 credits; S/CR/NC; NE; Fall,
Winter, Spring; Cherlon L Ussery
IDSC 203 Talking about Diversity This course prepares students to facilitate peer‐led conversations about
diversity in the Critical Conversations Program. Students learn about categories and theories related to
social identity, power, and inequality, and explore how identities including race, gender, class, and sexual
orientation affect individual experience and communal structures. Students engage in experiential exercises
that invite them to reflect on their own social identities and their reactions to difference, diversity, and
conflict. Students are required to keep a weekly journal and to participate in class leadership. Participants
in this class may apply to facilitate sections of IDSC 103, a 2‐credit student‐led course in winter term. 6
credits; NE, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
IDSC 235 Perspectives in Public Health This course will explore the many dimensions of public health within
the United States and provide an introduction to community based work and research. Public health is by
nature interdisciplinary and the course will address local public health issues through the lenses of social,
biological, and physical determinants of health. In addition to readings and discussions, the course will
incorporate the expertise of visiting public health practitioners and include site visits to local public health
agencies. Students will work collaboratively with a community partner on a public health‐related civic
engagement project selected during Fall term and continued during Winter Break. This is the first course of
a two course winter break program. Prerequisite: Interdisciplinary Studies 236 required winter term. 3
credits; IDS, NE; Not offered 2022‐23
IDSC 236 Public Health in Practice This course is the second part of a two‐term sequence beginning with
Perspectives in Public Health. Over the winter break, students will spend two weeks exploring a variety of
public health organizations both locally (Minneapolis/St. Paul) and nationally. During the winter term,
students will complete their final public health‐related civic engagement project in collaboration with a
community partner, set their individual project back into the wider context of public health, and prepare to
present their experience to a broader audience. Prerequisite: Interdisciplinary Studies 235. 6 credits; IDS,
ARP; Not offered 2022‐23
IDSC 238 Vaccines: Science, Skeptics, and Stakeholders Vaccines are often touted as one of humankind’s
greatest biomedical achievements. They have undoubtedly prevented hundreds of millions of deaths from
infectious diseases since their discovery. Yet, there remain many obstacles that prevent their wider
development and dissemination. Among these are the technological challenges associated with vaccine
development, the well funded anti‐vaccination movements that often thrive on and spread misinformation,
and economic hurdles that affect the production and equitable distribution of vaccines. Through an
interdisciplinary lens that incorporates material from biology, psychology, and economics, this course will
allow students to reach an integrated understanding of vaccines. 6 credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐23

236
IDSC 250 Color! If you had to explain to a blind person the nature of color, how would you describe it? Is it a
property of objects, oscillations of an electric field, a feature of how the eye generates electrochemical
signals to send to the brain, or perhaps a property of the experiences themselves? This team‐taught course
takes a multidisciplinary approach to color, drawing from physics, psychology, and philosophy. We will
explore topics such as the nature of light, visual anatomy, the process by which light is converted to a
neural code, color mixing, linguistic differences in color processing, and how color leads us to confront the
tension that sometimes exists between appearance and reality. Prerequisite: Any introductory PHIL or PSYC
course higher than 110 or any term of introductory PHYS course higher than 130 (PHYS 131 and 151 or 152
or a 10 week introductory course). 6 credits; NE; Winter; Marty Baylor, Jason A Decker, Julia F Strand
IDSC 251 Windows on the Good Life Human beings are always and everywhere challenged by the question:
What should I do to spend my mortal time well? One way to approach this ultimate challenge is to explore
some of the great cultural products of our civilization‐‐works that are a delight to read for their wisdom and
artfulness. This series of two‐credit courses will explore a philosophical dialogue of Plato in the fall, a work
from the Bible in the winter, and a pair of plays by Shakespeare in the spring. The course can be repeated
for credit throughout the year and in subsequent years. 2 credits; S/CR/NC; HI; Fall, Winter, Spring;
Laurence D Cooper, Alan Rubenstein
IDSC 257 Sense of Place: Art and Ecology in Tallgrass Prairie This project is a collaboration between two
courses—Grassland Ecology and Field Drawing—that will foster an interdisciplinary dialogue on the
Tallgrass Prairie Ecosystem. Students will work together to develop a project that explores how ecological
study and artistic expression can deepen their understanding of this landscape. The course will involve field
trips in the Carleton Arboretum, guest speakers, directed readings and culminate in a gallery exhibition.
Prerequisite: Previous or concurrent registration in Studio Art 113 or Biology 374. 2 credits; NE; Not offered
2022‐23
IDSC 258 Consensus or Contentious? Controversies in Science Then and Now Almost every global challenge
confronting humankind requires some level of engagement with science and technology. However, finding
solutions to our most pressing problems also requires an understanding of how science operates within its
social, political, and cultural context. This course will explore the relationship between science and society
by examining a series of controversies in science from both the past and the present. We will investigate
topics such as biological and social concepts of race, the use of unethically obtained scientific results, the
ethics of genomics research, legislation over vaccination mandates, “parachute” science, and climate
change denial. Examining the role of science in society will help us understand issues related to the use of
evidence, expertise, and the relationship between science and politics. By wrestling with current and
historic scientific controversies, we will examine the ways in which scientific disagreements are often as
much about values as they are about research methods. 2 credits; NE; Winter; Antony E Adler, Rika E
Anderson
IDSC 280 Learning from Internships Carleton does not grant credit for internships, but valuable off‐campus
learning experiences can be integrated into the academic program. Although the specific nature of
internship experiences will vary, internships are opportunities to apply and extend one's academic skills and
interests into work in non‐academic settings. This course will involve carefully monitored work experiences
in which a student has intentional learning goals. Achieving these goals will be measured through reflective
writing assignments, as well as written work in connection with assigned readings. Prerequisite: An
internship and learning contract approved by the Career Center Director of Internships. The internship must
be a minimum of 6 weeks and 180 hours and approved in advance by the instructor and the Career Center
Internship Program Director. 1 credit; S/CR/NC; NE; Fall; Yansi Pérez

237
IDSC 289 Science Fellows Research Colloquium This colloquium develops the skills needed to engage in and
communicate scientific and mathematical research. Topics will vary each term, but will include searching
and reading the primary literature and communicating results orally and via posters. The colloquium will
also explore the landscape of academic scientific research and how to negotiate the expectations of being a
research group member. Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 1 credit; S/CR/NC; NE; Fall, Spring; Amy
Csizmar Dalal
IDSC 298 FOCUS Sophomore Colloquium This colloquium is designed for sophomore students participating
in the Focusing on Cultivating Scientists program. It will provide an opportunity to participate in STEM‐
based projects on campus and in the community. The topics of this project‐based colloquium will vary each
term. Prerequisite: Interdisciplinary Studies 198 as first year student. 1 credit; S/CR/NC; NE; Fall, Winter,
Spring; Deborah S Gross

Japanese
See Asian Languages and Literatures.

Judaic Studies
Judaic Studies at Carleton provides students with the opportunity to explore aspects of Jewish
civilization in its historical and contemporary manifestations from the perspectives of a variety of
modern disciplines. Judaic Studies examines Jewish history, thought, literature and social life as
dimensions of the unique experience of the Jewish people within humanity's diverse cultural
endeavors.
Students may petition for a special major in Judaic Studies, or take a concentrated program within a
major in Religion. Judaic Studies courses are offered on a regular basis by the Religion Department
and by the Department of Middle Eastern Language. Pertinent courses are periodically offered in
other departments as well. For Hebrew course descriptions, refer to listings for Hebrew.
Courses Pertinent to Judaic Studies:
















CAMS 236 Israeli Society in Israeli Cinema (not offered in 2022‐23)
CAMS 236F Israeli Society in Israeli Cinema ‐ FLAC Hebrew Trailer (not offered in 2022‐23)
CCST 100 Cross Cultural Perspectives on Israeli and Palestinian Identity
HEBR 101 Elementary Modern Hebrew
HEBR 102 Elementary Modern Hebrew
HEBR 103 Elementary Modern Hebrew
HEBR 204 Intermediate Modern Hebrew (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 346 The Holocaust
MELA 121 East‐West in Israeli and Palestinian Fiction and Film (not offered in 2022‐23)
MELA 121F Middle Eastern Perspectives in Israeli and Palestinian Literature & Film FLAC Hebrew
Trailer
MELA 230 Jewish Collective Memory
RELG 120 Introduction to Judaism (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 161 The Jewish Bible (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 162 Jesus, the Bible, and Christian Beginnings (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 218 The Body in Judaism, Christianity, and Islam (not offered in 2022‐23)

238





RELG 219 Religious Law, Il/Legal Religions (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 221 Judaism and Gender (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 236 History of Antisemitism (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 322 Apocalypse How? (not offered in 2022‐23)

Students interested in Judaic Studies at Carleton or in off-campus programs in Judaic Studies should
consult with the Director of Judaic Studies.
See also Hebrew and Middle Eastern Languages

Linguistics
Linguistics is the study of the human language faculty, surely one of the most central components of
human nature. We study language from a variety of perspectives, including the construction of
illuminating descriptions of these extraordinarily complex systems, their acquisition by young
children, their realization in the brain, and how they change over time, among others.
We offer a major which emphasizes theoretical creativity and the ability to articulate insights in
both written and oral presentation, preparing students to confidently engage complexity and to make
sophisticated original contributions to intellectual inquiry more generally.
Prospective majors are encouraged to take LING 216 as sophomores, if possible. This course is
offered once per year, in the winter term. The upper-level requirements for the major can still be
comfortably completed if LING 216 is taken in the junior year, but as many of the 300-level courses
have LING 216 as their prerequisite, taking LING 216 as a sophomore affords much greater
flexibility. Prospective majors are invited to consult the department chair regarding long-term
course planning.
Requirements for the Linguistics Major
A total of 69 credits


Four core courses (24 credits)
Either LING 100 or 110 and the three remaining courses
o LING 100 The Noun (not offered in 2022‐23)
o LING 110 Introduction to Linguistics
o LING 115 Introduction to the Theory of Syntax
o LING 135 Introduction to Sociolinguistics (not offered in 2022‐23)
o LING 216 Generative Approaches to Syntax
o LING 217 Phonetics and Phonology



Three 300‐level courses (18 credits)
o LING 315 Topics in Syntax
o LING 316 Topics in Morphology (not offered in 2022‐23)
o LING 317 Topics in Phonology
o LING 325 Syntax of an Unfamiliar Language (not offered in 2022‐23)
o LING 340 Topics in Semantics (not offered in 2022‐23)
o LING 375 Second Language Acquisition: Speech (not offered in 2022‐23)

239
o

LING 376 Bilingualism & Code‐Switching



LING 399 and LING 400 (9 credits)



Three electives (18 credits)

o

o

At least two drawn from:
 ASLN 111 Writing Systems (not offered in 2022‐23)
 LING 117 Sociophonetics
 LING 135 Introduction to Sociolinguistics (not offered in 2022‐23)
 LING 150 From Esperanto to Dothraki: The Linguistics of Invented Languages
 LING 222 The Forms of Words in the World's Languages (not offered in 2022‐23)
 LING 232 Structure and History of German (not offered in 2022‐23)
 LING 240 Semantics and Pragmatics (not offered in 2022‐23)
 LING 275 First Language Acquisition (not offered in 2022‐23)
 LING 280 Field Methods in Linguistics (not offered in 2022‐23)
 LING 285 Japanese Linguistics in Kyoto Seminar: The Linguistics of the Japanese
Writing System
 LING 286 Japanese Linguistics in Kyoto Seminar: The Structure of Japanese
At most one drawn from:
 CGSC 232 Cognitive Processes
 CHIN 252 The Chinese Language: A Linguistic and Cultural Survey
 CS 202 Mathematics of Computer Science
 CS 254 Computability and Complexity
 CS 322 Natural Language Processing (not offered in 2022‐23)
 PHIL 210 Logic
 PHIL 223 Philosophy of Language (not offered in 2022‐23)
 PHIL 225 Philosophy of Mind (not offered in 2022‐23)
 PSYC 234 Psychology of Language
 PSYC 366 Cognitive Neuroscience (not offered in 2022‐23)
 PSYC 375 Language and Deception (not offered in 2022‐23)

Linguistics Courses
LING 100 The Noun We've all been taught that nouns are people, places, and things. Yet, these seemingly
simple linguistic objects are surprisingly complex. For instance, languages vary in what information (e.g.,
case, gender, person, number) nouns display. Even within a single language, the form of a noun may change
depending on its function within a sentence or its function within a conversation. This course uses
contemporary linguistic theories to account for the many varied forms of nouns throughout the world's
languages. No familiarity with languages other than English is required. 6 credits; AI, WR1; Not offered
2022‐23
LING 110 Introduction to Linguistics The capacity to acquire and use natural languages such as English is
surely one of the more remarkable features of human nature. In this course, we explore several aspects of
this ability. Topics include the sound systems of natural languages, the structure of words, principles that
regulate word order, the course of language acquisition in children, and what these reveal about the nature
of the mind. 6 credits; FSR; Winter, Spring; Jenna T Conklin
LING 115 Introduction to the Theory of Syntax This course is organized to enable the student to actively
participate in the construction of a rather elaborate theory of the nature of human cognitive capacity to

240
acquire and use natural languages. In particular, we concentrate on one aspect of that capacity: the
unconscious acquisition of a grammar that enables a speaker of a language to produce and recognize
sentences that have not been previously encountered. In the first part of the course, we concentrate on
gathering notation and terminology intended to allow an explicit and manageable description. In the
second part, we depend on written and oral student contributions in a cooperative enterprise of theory
construction. 6 credits; FSR; Fall, Spring; Morgan Rood
LING 117 Sociophonetics This course is a theoretical and practical introduction to studying phonetics (the
science of speech) and its relation to sociolinguistic variation (how speech systematically varies across
speakers). Throughout the course, students will collect their own conversational speech data and learn to
conduct acoustic analysis. Skills developed in the course include recording speech, transcribing, data
processing and normalization, and effective presentation of results. 6 credits; SI, QRE; Spring; Morgan Rood
LING 135 Introduction to Sociolinguistics There is a complex relationship between language and society.
This course examines how language variation is tied to identity and the role of language in human social
interaction. We will consider language as it relates to social status, age, gender, ethnicity, and location as
well as theoretical models used to study variation. We will also examine how language is used in
conversation, in the media, and beyond using ethnography of communication and discourse analysis. You
will become more aware of how language is used in your own daily life and will be able to argue
sociolinguistic perspectives on language attitudes. 6 credits; SI, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
LING 150 From Esperanto to Dothraki: The Linguistics of Invented Languages What lies behind the human
urge to construct new languages? How has language invention changed over time? What can invented
languages teach us about the function of natural languages and their syntactic, morphological, and
phonological structure? In this course, students will dive into the history of invented languages, tackle the
question of what constitutes a language, and ultimately try their hand at constructing their own language.
We’ll explore what separates natural languages from invented ones and discuss how often the very
qualities that their creators find most desirable inhibit the widespread adoption they envision for their
languages. 6 credits; SI; Fall; Jenna T Conklin
LING 216 Generative Approaches to Syntax This course has two primary goals: to provide participants with
a forum to continue to develop their analytical skills (i.e. to 'do syntax'), and to acquaint them with
generative syntactic theory, especially the Principles and Parameters approach. Participants will sharpen
their technological acumen, through weekly problem solving, and engage in independent thinking and
analysis, by means of formally proposing novel syntactic analyses for linguistic phenomena. By the
conclusion of the course, participants will be prepared to read and critically evaluate primary literature
couched within this theoretical framework. Prerequisite: Linguistics 115. 6 credits; FSR; Winter; Morgan
Rood
LING 217 Phonetics and Phonology Although no two utterances are ever exactly the same, we humans
don't function like tape recorders; we overlook distinctions to which mechanical recording devices are
sensitive, and we "hear" contrasts which are objectively not there. What we (think we) hear is determined
by the sound system of the language we speak. This course examines the sound systems of human
languages, focusing on how speech sounds are produced and perceived, and how these units come to be
organized into a systematic network in the minds of speakers of languages. Prerequisite: 100‐level
Linguistics course. 6 credits; FSR; Fall; Jenna T Conklin
LING 222 The Forms of Words in the World's Languages Languages vary in what kind of information is
morphologically expressed. The form words take is, in part, governed by complex systems called "case" and

241
"agreement." In general, case refers to forms of nouns, and agreement refers to forms of verbs. We go
beyond familiar case patterns in which subjects are Nominative and objects are Accusative and familiar
agreement patterns in which verbs display the person, gender, and/or number of subjects. We investigate
the morphological patterns in at least a dozen (probably more!) languages with the goals of arriving at both
cross‐linguistic generalizations and language‐particular nuances. No familiarity with languages other than
English is required. Prerequisite: 100‐level linguistics course. 6 credits; FSR; Not offered 2022‐23
LING 232 Structure and History of German Why does German sometimes put the verb second and
sometimes at the end, and how did this strange arrangement emerge? What differentiates the
Scandinavian languages from Germanic tongues from more central latitudes? How did Germans come to
say Apfel, while English and Dutch speakers say apple/appel? This course will explore these and similar
questions, providing a linguistic overview of the German language and investigating key historical
developments in the Germanic language family. Key topics will include dialectal variation, historical sound
change, and syntactic structure, with primary focus on German and some attention to the Germanic
language family as a whole. Prerequisite: Either previous or concurrent enrollment in any Carleton
Linguistics courses or knowledge of German or another Germanic language (not English). Concurrent
enrollment in German 101 or higher statisfies the knowledge of German requirement. 6 credits; HI, IS; Not
offered 2022‐23
LING 240 Semantics and Pragmatics A central part of the grammar of a language is the meaning associated
with words and phrases. This course explores the multi‐faceted system that speakers access both when
producing sentences and when interpreting them. Topics include the complexity surrounding actually
defining words, the meanings of various modal verbs, and theories of pragmatics and the rules of
conversation, among other topics. Content will differ slightly, depending on whether students have had
previous linguistics courses or not. 6 credits; SI; Not offered 2022‐23
LING 275 First Language Acquisition Humans are unique among animals in that we are able to attain native
speaker competency in any language(s) we receive a sufficient amount of exposure to during our
development. The path of acquisition is remarkably stable regardless of the language(s) being acquired, and
is believed to yield insights into the nature of human language. In this course, we explore children's
capacity to acquire language, with a focus on its implications for linguistic theory. Topics include acquisition
of phonology, morphology, syntax, and semantics, and acquisition in extraordinary circumstances.
Prerequisite: 100‐level linguistics course. 6 credits; LS; Not offered 2022‐23
LING 280 Field Methods in Linguistics This course will introduce students to techniques of linguistic
research and analysis through direct work with a native speaker of a language not taught at Carleton.
Students will learn techniques for eliciting, organizing, describing, and analyzing data in an ethically
responsible and scientifically rigorous manner. Our goal is to develop a description of the language‐‐
primarily, aspects of its phonology, morphology, and syntax‐‐through working exclusively with a native
speaker. Each student will investigate some aspect of the language in depth, culminating in a class
presentation and research report. Prerequisite: 100‐level Linguistics course. 6 credits; LS; Not offered 2022‐
23
LING 285 Japanese Linguistics in Kyoto Seminar: The Linguistics of the Japanese Writing System The
Japanese writing system is often said to be the most complicated in the world, even as Japan has among
the very highest literacy rates. In this course, we will closely examine this extraordinary aspect of Japanese
society, including its history, relationship with the spoken language, psychological processing, and neural
implementation. Finally, we will examine the controversy concerning the use of Kanji, its political
ramifications, and look at how the Japanese are responding to various pressures on the system. Experience

242
with Japanese is not necessary. Prerequisite: 100‐level Linguistics course. 6 credits; SI, IS; Spring; Mike J
Flynn
LING 286 Japanese Linguistics in Kyoto Seminar: The Structure of Japanese This course examines the nature
of the Japanese language through the lens of contemporary linguistic theory. Topics include the history of
the language, its sound structure, word formation operations, syntax, and its use in social and artistic
contexts. This course is not intended to teach students to speak Japanese, and while experience with
Japanese would be helpful, it is not necessary. Prerequisite: 100‐level Linguistics course. 6 credits; FSR, IS;
Spring; Mike J Flynn
LING 315 Topics in Syntax More on syntax. Particular topics vary by year and student interest. Prerequisite:
Linguistics 216. 6 credits; FSR; Fall; Morgan Rood
LING 316 Topics in Morphology This course explores how languages form words and how contemporary
theories account for this complicated process. We concentrate primarily on the interaction between
morphology and syntax, but we may also explore the relationship between morphology and phonology.
While we will investigate a wide variety of languages, no familiarity with any language other than English is
required. Prerequisite: Linguistics 216. 6 credits; FSR; Not offered 2022‐23
LING 317 Topics in Phonology More on phonology. This course examines a small number of topics in depth.
Particular topics vary from year to year. Prerequisite: Linguistics 217. 6 credits; FSR; Winter; Jenna T Conklin
LING 325 Syntax of an Unfamiliar Language In this course we examine, with the help of a native speaker
consultant, the syntax of a language deliberately chosen for its being unfamiliar to all the participants. Our
goals will be to construct a coherent and theoretically respectable account of principles of the grammar of
this language, and to understand what our account reveals about the structure of human language
generally. Each student will investigate some aspect of the syntax of the language in depth, culminating in a
class presentation and research report. Prerequisite: Linguistics 216. 6 credits; LS; Not offered 2022‐23
LING 340 Topics in Semantics Semantics is the study of what words and constructions mean in a language
and how speakers come to actually interpret those meanings. In this course we explore several objects of
inquiry within the field of semantics, including compositional semantics (i.e., the computation of meaning
over syntactic structures), lexical semantics (with a particular emphasis on verb meanings), and how the
various interpretations of ambiguous constructions are derived. Prerequisite: Linguistics 216. 6 credits; FSR;
Not offered 2022‐23
LING 375 Second Language Acquisition: Speech Why do some people acquiring a second language obtain a
pronunciation indistinguishable from that of native speakers, while others, despite excellent skills in the
areas of syntax, semantics, and vocabulary, never shed their “foreign accent”? In this seminar, we will
explore theoretical models that examine the impact of factors like age of acquisition, length of residence,
motivation, learning environment, language identity, and native language on the phonetics and phonology
of second language acquisition, looking at speech production and perception. The course will be organized
around a term‐long collaborative research project, with goals and topics set by the class. Prerequisite:
Linguistics 217. 6 credits; SI, QRE; Not offered 2022‐23
LING 376 Bilingualism & Code‐Switching Code‐switching, or shifting between two shared languages, is a
common practice of bilinguals around the globe. This course explores current research on code‐switching,
focusing particularly on when and why code‐switching occurs and what linguistic, cultural, and cognitive
restrictions it is subject to. These questions will take us on a wide‐ranging exploration of bilingualism as a
phenomenon, touching on sociolinguistic issues, questions of language structure, the impacts of code‐

243
switching on pronunciation, and theoretical issues in the study of multilingualism broadly construed, such
as how bilinguals maintain multiple linguistic systems within a single cognitive environment. Prerequisite:
Either Linguistics 216 or Linguistics 217. 6 credits; SI; Spring; Jenna T Conklin
LING 399 Senior Thesis 3 credits; S/CR/NC; FSR; Fall; Cherlon L Ussery
LING 400 Integrative Exercise 6 credits; S/NC; Winter

Literary and Cultural Studies
LCST 101 Buddhist Studies in India Program: Elementary Tibetan This course seeks to develop students’
level of proficiency in spoken Tibetan for basic communication, as well as the ability to read and write
simple sentence constructions. Learning is grounded in written Tibetan, covering the alphabet,
pronunciation, grammar, and basic vocabulary. Reading and comprehension skills are enhanced through
direct translation of essential texts such as the Heart Sutra and a prayer of Manjushri. Students gain facility
with spoken Tibetan through classroom drills and informal practice with Tibetans in Bodh Gaya. Students
will also improve their understanding of Tibetan culture and society through this course. Prerequisite:
Acceptance into the Buddhist Studies India program. 7‐8 credits; NE; Fall; Arthur P McKeown
LCST 101 Buddhist Studies in India: Elementary Thai Language This course provides instruction for non‐
native speakers to basic Thai language for daily use. Language instruction is based in Thai social context and
Thai manners for communication. Students are introduced to the Thai language’s fundamental grammar
rules, and its tonal system and sounds. Students gain facility with spoken Thai through classroom
instruction and informal practice with native speakers. Prerequisite: Acceptance in Buddhist Studies in India
Program. 8 credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐23
LCST 101 Buddhist Studies India Program: Elementary Hindi An introduction to basic colloquial Hindi
speaking and writing skills for everyday interactions in Northern India. Essential grammar is introduced and
reviewed in morning meetings, and conversational and reading abilities are developed in afternoon
practice. Students are encouraged to practice speaking and listening comprehension by conversing with
Hindi speakers outside of class. Prerequisite: Acceptance in Buddhist Studies India Program. 7‐8 credits; NE;
Fall; Arthur P McKeown
LCST 101 Cross‐Cultural Psychology in Prague: Elementary Czech This highly recommended language course
will meet twice per week and emphasize basic listening and speaking skills. Students will be challenged to
utilize their new language skills in everyday situations. Prerequisite: Enrollment in Cross‐Cultural Psychology
in Prague Program. 4 credits; S/CR/NC; NE; Fall; Ken B Abrams
LCST 101 Ecology and Anthropology Tanzania Program: Elementary Swahili Elementary Swahili introduces
students to the communicative use of Swahili, emphasizing communicative competence in real contexts.
Ninety percent of instruction is conducted in the target language. Vocabulary and grammar are taught in
context. Instruction pays attention to the cultural information in relevant contexts of communication. The
main learning/teaching styles used include role plays, prepared presentations, interactive lectures,
classroom conversations, and dramatization. In addition to the class textbook, authentic source materials
are used, such as pictures, songs, short stories, poems and essays. Student assessment is continuous, and
includes classroom participation, homework, written exams and oral exams. Prerequisite: Participation in
Ecology & Anthropology in Tanzania. 7‐8 credits; NE; Fall; Anna B Estes

244
LCST 101 Globalizaton & Local Responses in India Program: Elementary Hindi This course will introduce
students to the basics of spoken and written Hindi. This will give students an investment in Indian culture
and allow them to interact with their surroundings with some degree of familiarity. Prerequisite:
Enrollment in Globalization & Local Responses in India Program. 3 credits; S/CR/NC; NE, IS; Winter; Brendan
P LaRocque
LCST 101 Rome Program: Elementary Italian This highly‐recommended language course will emphasize
basic listening and speaking skills. Students will be challenged to utilize their new language skills in everyday
situations. Prerequisite: Enrollment in Rome OCS program. 3 credits; S/CR/NC; NE; Spring; William L North
LCST 103 Buddhist Studies India Program: Intermediate Hindi This course builds on the student’s previous
training in spoken and written Hindi language. Students will gain the ability to initiate and sustain
conversations with Hindi speakers, read and write in Hindi about personal and social situations, as well as
extract the main idea and information from descriptive and narrative texts. Students will apply their
language learning and deepen their understanding of Indian culture through interaction with local residents
and participation in seasonal festivals and other activities. Prerequisite: Acceptance in Buddhist Studies
India OCS Program required. 7‐8 credits; NE; Fall; Arthur P McKeown
LCST 245 The Critical Toolbox: Who's Afraid of Theory? This class introduces students to the various
theoretical frameworks and the many approaches scholars can use when analyzing a text (whether this text
is a film, an image, a literary piece or a performance). What do words like ‘structuralism,’ ‘ecocriticism,’
'cultural studies,' and ‘postcolonial studies’ refer to? Most importantly, how do they help us understand the
world around us? This class will be organized around interdisciplinary theoretical readings and exercises in
cultural analysis. Prerequisite: At least one 200‐ or 300‐level course in Literary/Artistic Analysis (in any
language) or instructor permission. 6 credits; LA, WR2, IS; Winter; Seth E Peabody
LCST 250 Songs and Stories: Music and/as Language Can music tell a story? Can a novel be symphonic?
Drawing principally on the French tradition, this course will investigate these “simple” questions, exploring
the relationship between language and music. Starting with basic concepts of syntax and narration, we will
trace the intertwining of these two modes of expression in works from the eighteenth through the twenty‐
first centuries. The class will then explore the relationship of language in musical genres such as the
chanson, advertising jingles, pop, and hip hop, in works by Debussy, Satie, d’Indy, Messiaen, MC Solaar,
and others. Readings include such authors as Poe, Baudelaire, Mallarmé, Ernaux, and more. Some
knowledge of French and/or musical notation is helpful. Students taking the course for French credit will do
some work in French, and must also sign up for French 211, a two‐credit trailer course. 6 credits; LA, IS;
Winter; Scott D Carpenter, Ronald Rodman

Latin American Studies
The Latin American Studies Program provides a framework for studying the diverse societies of
Latin America. With its cultural mosaic shaped by the meeting of Native American, European,
African, and Asian peoples, and its profound geographic, social, and economic variations, Latin
America presents rich opportunities for interdisciplinary and cross-cultural study. By drawing upon
the perspectives and methodologies of several disciplines, students are challenged to pursue a
deeper understanding of the cultures, institutions, and experiences of Latin Americans. The program
provides a forum for examining the intersection of issues of politics, economic development,
ethnicity, gender, religion, and cultural expression.

245

Students interested in exploring Latin American Studies as a possible major are strongly encouraged
to enroll in at least one of several gateway courses early in their career at Carleton. Those
designated courses are: History 170 Modern Latin America, 1810-present, Political Science 221
Latin American Politics, Sociology/Anthropology 353 Ethnography of Latin America, and Spanish
242 Introduction to Latin American Literature.
Requirements for the Latin American Studies Major
Students complete a minimum of 66 credits in approved courses for the major. Majors must also
demonstrate competence in Spanish by completing Spanish 205 or equivalent.
Required Courses: (The following core courses are required of all majors):

o
o
o

HIST 170 Modern Latin America 1810‐Present (not offered in 2022‐23)
LTAM 300 Issues in Latin American Studies
LTAM 400 Integrative Exercise

In addition, majors are required to complete:




Two 300‐level Latin America‐focused courses offered in the Spanish department
One 300‐level history, or sociology/anthropology, or political science course focused on Latin
America
30 additional credits of electives from the list below. The 300‐level courses in the Spanish
department that are required are always taught in the language.

Students are strongly encouraged to complete the non-Spanish 300-level course prior to writing
their integrative exercise, and to select a 300-level course in a discipline appropriate to the focus of
their anticipated comps topic. Students who complete this requirement with a 300-level history
course must take at least one approved sociology and anthropology or political science course as an
elective.
Up to 27 credits from work in approved off-campus programs may be counted as electives for the
major. Credits in natural science courses taken in Latin America may be applied toward the
electives requirement if the director approves. Up to twelve elective credits may be comparative or
Latino in focus (Economics 240, 241, Religion 227, Sociology/Anthropology 203, 233, 259). No
more than four courses (twenty-four credits) in any one discipline may apply to the major.
Elective Courses:










AMST 130 Latinx Social Movements: From Bandits to the Young Lords (not offered in 2022‐23)
AMST 396 Producing Latinidad
ARCN 111 Archaeology of the Americas (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARCN 211 Coercion and Exploitation: Material Histories of Labor
CAMS 296 Cinema and Cultural Change in Chile and Argentina (not offered in 2022‐23)
ECON 240 Microeconomics of Development
ECON 242 Economy of Latin America (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 119 Introduction to U.S. Latino/a Literature (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 227 Imagining the Borderlands

246



































ENGL 241 Latinx Voices in the Age of Trump
HIST 170 Modern Latin America 1810‐Present (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 272 Music and Movement in Atlantic World History (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 275 Latin American Immigration to the US
HIST 279 Central American Revolutions
LTAM 110 Portuguese for Spanish Speakers (not offered in 2022‐23)
LTAM 250 Indigeneity and Power in the Andes: Land, Labor, Knowledge (not offered in 2022‐23)
LTAM 398 Latin American Forum (not offered in 2022‐23)
MUSC 241 Music of Latin America (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 120 Democracy and Dictatorship
POSC 221 Latin American Politics (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 227 Contemporary Capitalisms
RELG 227 Liberation Theologies (not offered in 2022‐23)
SOAN 203 Anthropology of Good Intentions (not offered in 2022‐23)
SOAN 233 Anthropology of Food
SOAN 313 Woke Nature: Towards an Anthropology of Non‐Human Beings
SOAN 323 Mother Earth: Women, Development and the Environment (not offered in 2022‐23)
SOAN 333 Environmental Anthropology (not offered in 2022‐23)
SOAN 343 Advanced Ethnographic Workshop (not offered in 2022‐23)
SOAN 353 Ethnography of Latin America (not offered in 2022‐23)
SPAN 218 Introduction to Latin American Cinema
SPAN 220 Racism, Immigration, and Gender in Contemporary Latin American Narrative (not offered
in 2022‐23)
SPAN 242 Introduction to Latin American Literature
SPAN 245 On Cannibals, Witches, and Zombies (not offered in 2022‐23)
SPAN 262 Myth and History in Central American Literature (not offered in 2022‐23)
SPAN 277 The Poem as Artifact: Art and Work in Contemporary Spanish American Poetry (not
offered in 2022‐23)
SPAN 319 Works on Work: Films and Literature on Labor in Latin America (not offered in 2022‐23)
SPAN 321 Murder as a Fine Art: The Detective Novel in Latin America (not offered in 2022‐23)
SPAN 330 The Invention of the Modern Novel: Cervantes' Don Quijote
SPAN 358 The Spanish Civil War (not offered in 2022‐23)
SPAN 360 Race and Nation in Caribbean Literature (not offered in 2022‐23)
SPAN 366 Jorge Luis Borges: Less a Man Than a Vast and Complex Literature
SPAN 376 Mexico City: The City as Protagonist (not offered in 2022‐23)
SPAN 380 Dispossession, Gentrification, and Reoccupation in Latin America

Latin American Studies Minor
The Latin American Studies Minor provides students with a framework for developing a deeper
understanding of Latin American history, society, and culture from an interdisciplinary perspective,
and is intended to complement a disciplinary major. Minors pursue a program of study combining
language training with courses in the humanities and social sciences, culminating in an integrative
seminar.
Students interested in exploring Latin American Studies as a possible minor are strongly
encouraged to enroll in at least one of several gateway courses early in their career at Carleton.

247

Those designated courses are: History 170 Modern Latin America, 1810-present, Political Science
221 Latin American Politics, Sociology/Anthropology 353 Ethnography of Latin America, and
Spanish 242 Introduction to Latin American Literature.
Requirements for the Latin American Studies Minor






HIST 170 Modern Latin America, 1810‐present (not offered 2022‐23)
LTAM 300 Issues in Latin American Studies
LTAM 398 Latin American Forum
6 credits in Latin American Literature (above Spanish 219 and not in translation) from the list below
18 elective credits

o



6 credits from the list below in an advanced course in the Social Sciences (200‐300 level in
Economics, Political Science, or Sociology/Anthropology)
o 12 credits focusing on Latin American (and/or US. Latino Literature) from the list below or
relevant off‐campus studies programs (Carleton or non‐Carleton affiliated).
Students must also complete Spanish 204 or equivalent

Electives may be chosen from the following list:































AMST 130 Latinx Social Movements: From Bandits to the Young Lords (not offered in 2022‐23)
AMST 396 Producing Latinidad
ARCN 111 Archaeology of the Americas (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARCN 211 Coercion and Exploitation: Material Histories of Labor
CAMS 296 Cinema and Cultural Change in Chile and Argentina (not offered in 2022‐23)
ECON 240 Microeconomics of Development
ECON 242 Economy of Latin America (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 119 Introduction to U.S. Latino/a Literature (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 227 Imagining the Borderlands
ENGL 241 Latinx Voices in the Age of Trump
HIST 170 Modern Latin America 1810‐Present (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 272 Music and Movement in Atlantic World History (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 275 Latin American Immigration to the US
HIST 279 Central American Revolutions
LTAM 110 Portuguese for Spanish Speakers (not offered in 2022‐23)
LTAM 250 Indigeneity and Power in the Andes: Land, Labor, Knowledge (not offered in 2022‐23)
LTAM 398 Latin American Forum (not offered in 2022‐23)
MUSC 241 Music of Latin America (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 120 Democracy and Dictatorship
POSC 221 Latin American Politics (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 227 Contemporary Capitalisms
RELG 227 Liberation Theologies (not offered in 2022‐23)
SOAN 203 Anthropology of Good Intentions (not offered in 2022‐23)
SOAN 233 Anthropology of Food
SOAN 313 Woke Nature: Towards an Anthropology of Non‐Human Beings
SOAN 323 Mother Earth: Women, Development and the Environment (not offered in 2022‐23)
SOAN 333 Environmental Anthropology (not offered in 2022‐23)
SOAN 343 Advanced Ethnographic Workshop (not offered in 2022‐23)
SOAN 353 Ethnography of Latin America (not offered in 2022‐23)
SPAN 218 Introduction to Latin American Cinema

248














SPAN 220 Racism, Immigration, and Gender in Contemporary Latin American Narrative (not offered
in 2022‐23)
SPAN 242 Introduction to Latin American Literature
SPAN 245 On Cannibals, Witches, and Zombies (not offered in 2022‐23)
SPAN 262 Myth and History in Central American Literature (not offered in 2022‐23)
SPAN 277 The Poem as Artifact: Art and Work in Contemporary Spanish American Poetry (not
offered in 2022‐23)
SPAN 319 Works on Work: Films and Literature on Labor in Latin America (not offered in 2022‐23)
SPAN 321 Murder as a Fine Art: The Detective Novel in Latin America (not offered in 2022‐23)
SPAN 330 The Invention of the Modern Novel: Cervantes' Don Quijote
SPAN 358 The Spanish Civil War (not offered in 2022‐23)
SPAN 360 Race and Nation in Caribbean Literature (not offered in 2022‐23)
SPAN 366 Jorge Luis Borges: Less a Man Than a Vast and Complex Literature
SPAN 376 Mexico City: The City as Protagonist (not offered in 2022‐23)
SPAN 380 Dispossession, Gentrification, and Reoccupation in Latin America

Latin American Studies Courses
LTAM 110 Portuguese for Spanish Speakers This fast‐paced introductory Portuguese language course
focuses on developing communication skills and emphasizes speaking, reading, and writing. Previous
knowledge of Spanish is assumed in presentation of grammar and vocabulary. Prerequisite: Spanish 204 or
instructor permission. 3 credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐23
LTAM 250 Indigeneity and Power in the Andes: Land, Labor, Knowledge In this course, we will read, discuss,
and engage with recent scholarship on colonialism, indigenous and communitarian feminism, and some of
the issues and movements of indigenous peoples in the Andean region. We will examine the colonial and
twentieth‐century origins of the movements for indigenous rights in the Andes and seek an understanding
of the varied meanings of indigeneity across time. We will emphasize the comparative study of Indigenous‐
State relations across the Andean countries, and highlight the role of indigenous women and other gender
identities for the development of native agendas for autonomy and sovereign rights. Our primary materials
will mainly focus on literature and visual arts authored by indigenous artists. Other readings will draw from
scholarship in history, anthropology, and Indigenous Studies. This course will be taught in English. 6 credits;
HI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
LTAM 300 Issues in Latin American Studies This is an advanced multidisciplinary research seminar on
contemporary Latin America. New forms of political populism, indigenous understanding of the relationship
between human and non‐human forms of being, transformative urbanistic solutions at work in its largest
cities, the political economy of migration, and vibrant cultures of protest, will be among our topics of study.
Ideal for students going to or returning from study abroad in Latin America. Required course for minors and
majors in Latin American Studies. Prerequisite: Latin American Studies gateway course. 6 credits; SI, IS; Fall;
Silvia López
LTAM 398 Latin American Forum This colloquium will explore specific issues or works in Latin American
Studies through discussion of a common reading, public presentation, project, and/or performance that
constitute the annual Latin American Forum. Students will be required to attend two meetings during the
term to discuss the common reading or other material and must attend, without exception. All events of
the Forum which take place during fourth week of spring term (on Friday afternoon and Saturday morning).
A short integrative essay or report will be required at the end of the term. Intended as capstone for the
Latin American Studies minor. 2 credits; HI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23

249
LTAM 400 Integrative Exercise Satisfactory completion of the major includes the writing of a thesis which
attempts to integrate at least two of the various disciplines studied. A proposal must be submitted for
approval early in the fall term of the senior year. The thesis in its final form is due no later than the end of
the first week of spring term. An oral defense of the thesis is required. 1‐6 credit; S/NC; Fall, Winter, Spring

Mathematics and Statistics
Mathematics is an art, a pure science, a language, and an analytical tool for the natural and social
sciences, a means of exploring philosophical questions, and a beautiful edifice that is a tribute to
human creativity. The mathematics curriculum is designed to provide essential skills for students in
a variety of disciplines and to provide mathematics majors with a deep understanding of
mathematics as it has evolved over the past two thousand years and how it is practiced today.
Statistics is the science of giving meaning to data in the context of uncertainty. Statisticians are
involved in data collection and study design, data analysis, and the communication of information
to a broad audience. The statistics curriculum is designed to balance both statistical theory and
application, and will provide students the opportunity to work on real world data problems and
enhance their communication skills.
Students who wish to major in both Mathematics and Statistics should note the College policy that
double majors may count no more than four courses toward both majors. Courses for which a
student earns AP Credit, such as calculus, are included among these four courses.
Mathematics Skills Center:
This Center offers extra assistance to students in lower-level mathematics courses and other courses
requiring basic mathematical skills.

Requirements for the Mathematics Major
The Mathematics major requires 72 credits:




A. Required Core Courses (take either Mathematics 101 or 111 and either Mathematics 210 or 211
and all of remaining courses listed):
o MATH 101 Calculus with Problem Solving
o MATH 111 Introduction to Calculus
o MATH 120 Calculus 2
o MATH 210 Calculus 3
o MATH 211 Introduction to Multivariable Calculus
o MATH 232 Linear Algebra
o MATH 236 Mathematical Structures
B. Electives (36 credits): Six courses from among:
o CS 252 Algorithms
o CS 254 Computability and Complexity
o CS 352 Advanced Algorithms (not offered in 2022‐23)
o MATH 240 Probability

250
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o

MATH 241 Ordinary Differential Equations
MATH 244 Geometries (not offered in 2022‐23)
MATH 251 Chaotic Dynamics
MATH 261 Functions of a Complex Variable
MATH 271 Computational Mathematics
MATH 282 Elementary Theory of Numbers
MATH 295 Mathematics and Democracy (not offered in 2022‐23)
MATH 295 Mathematics of Climate (not offered in 2022‐23)
MATH 321 Real Analysis I
MATH 331 Real Analysis II
MATH 332 Advanced Linear Algebra (not offered in 2022‐23)
MATH 333 Combinatorial Theory (not offered in 2022‐23)
MATH 341 Partial Differential Equations
MATH 342 Abstract Algebra I
MATH 344 Differential Geometry
MATH 349 Methods of Teaching Mathematics (not offered in 2022‐23)
MATH 352 Topics in Abstract Algebra
MATH 354 Topology (not offered in 2022‐23)
MATH 361 Complex Analysis (not offered in 2022‐23)
MATH 395 Introduction to Analytic Number Theory
MATH 395 Geometric Group Theory
STAT 250 Introduction to Statistical Inference
STAT 320 Time Series Analysis (not offered in 2022‐23)
STAT 340 Bayesian Statistics

At least four of these electives must be Carleton courses with a MATH designation. At least three of
the following five areas of mathematics must be represented by the six electives (36 credits).








Algebra:
o MATH 282 Elementary Theory of Numbers
o MATH 332 Advanced Linear Algebra (not offered in 2022‐23)
o MATH 342 Abstract Algebra I
o MATH 352 Topics in Abstract Algebra
Analysis:
o MATH 251 Chaotic Dynamics
o MATH 261 Functions of a Complex Variable
o MATH 321 Real Analysis I
o MATH 331 Real Analysis II
o MATH 361 Complex Analysis (not offered in 2022‐23)
Applied Mathematics:
o MATH 240 Probability
o MATH 241 Ordinary Differential Equations
o MATH 271 Computational Mathematics
o MATH 341 Partial Differential Equations
o STAT 250 Introduction to Statistical Inference
o STAT 320 Time Series Analysis (not offered in 2022‐23)
o STAT 340 Bayesian Statistics
Discrete Structures:
o CS 252 Algorithms
o CS 254 Computability and Complexity

251
o
o



CS 352 Advanced Algorithms (not offered in 2022‐23)
MATH 333 Combinatorial Theory (not offered in 2022‐23)
Geometry and Topology:
o MATH 244 Geometries (not offered in 2022‐23)
o MATH 344 Differential Geometry
o MATH 354 Topology (not offered in 2022‐23)

Of the six advanced courses, at least four must be Carleton courses with a Mathematics designation.
Advanced courses substituted for Mathematics 232 or Mathematics 236 must also be Carleton
courses with a Mathematics designation.
In addition, each senior major must complete an integrative exercise, Mathematics 400 (6 credits)
which can be either a group or individual project. Majors must also accumulate eight talk credits
during their junior and senior year by attending colloquia and the comps talks of their fellow
mathematics or statistics majors. Students who major in both Mathematics and Statistics must
accumulate a total of thirteen talk credits. We encourage majors to participate in the numerous
activities that take place in the department.
Potential majors with especially strong preparation may petition the department for permission to
substitute an advanced course for Mathematics 232 and/or for Mathematics 236. Advanced courses
substituted for Mathematics 232 or Mathematics 236 must also be Carleton courses with a
Mathematics designation.
There are many patterns of courses for the major depending upon a student's mathematical interests
and career goals. A guide for majors, which supplies information about suitable patterns of courses,
is available on the Mathematics and Statistics Department website.
Major under Combined Plan in Engineering:
In addition to completing requirements for the mathematics major listed above including
Mathematics 241 and 341, the student should take the following courses required for admission to
engineering schools: Two terms of 100-level Physics, Chemistry 123, 224, and Computer Science
111.
Requirements for the Statistics Major
The requirements for the Statistics Major are 74 credits:




A. Supporting Courses (30 credits) Take either Mathematics 101 or 111 and either Mathematics
210 or 211 and all of remaining courses listed:
o CS 111 Introduction to Computer Science
o MATH 101 Calculus with Problem Solving
o MATH 111 Introduction to Calculus
o MATH 120 Calculus 2
o MATH 210 Calculus 3
o MATH 211 Introduction to Multivariable Calculus
o MATH 232 Linear Algebra
B. Required Core (18 credits): All of the following, of which at least two must be taken at Carleton
o MATH 240 Probability

252
o
o





STAT 230 Applied Regression Analysis
STAT 250 Introduction to Statistical Inference
C. Electives (18 credits): Three electives, of which at least two must be Carleton courses with a
Statistics designation
o CS 314 Data Visualization
o CS 320 Machine Learning (not offered in 2022‐23)
o CS 362 Computational Biology (not offered in 2022‐23)
o MATH 271 Computational Mathematics
o STAT 220 Introduction to Data Science
o STAT 260 Introduction to Sampling Techniques (not offered in 2022‐23)
o STAT 310 Spatial Statistics
o STAT 320 Time Series Analysis (not offered in 2022‐23)
o STAT 330 Advanced Statistical Modeling
o STAT 340 Bayesian Statistics
D. Statistical Practice (2 credits):

o

Statistics 285 (formerly Mathematics 280) Statistical Consulting

In addition, each senior major must complete an integrative exercise. Statistics 400 (6 credits),
which can be either a group or individual project. Majors must accumulate eight talk credits during
their junior and senior year by attending department colloquia and the comps talks of their fellow
mathematics or statistics majors. Students who major in both Mathematics and Statistics must
accumulate a total of thirteen talk credits. We encourage majors to participate in the numerous
activities that take place in the department.
We recommend statistics majors also take courses in a discipline in which statistics can be applied.
Students interested in data science should consider taking additional computer science courses.
Students considering graduate school in statistics or biostatistics are strongly encouraged to take
Mathematics 236 (Mathematical Structures) and Mathematics 321 (Real Analysis). Consult a
statistics faculty member for more information specific to your choice of program.

Requirements for the Mathematics Minor
To earn a minor in Mathematics, a student must earn 42 credits from courses taken in the
Department of Mathematics and Statistics at Carleton. (Students who place out of courses based on
work done outside of Carleton are still required to earn 42 credits from courses taken in the
Department of Mathematics and Statistics at Carleton.) At least 36 of the required 42 credits must
come from courses with a Mathematics designation. In addition, the only Statistics courses which
can be counted toward the Mathematics minor are Statistics 250, 320 and 340.
Students who wish to major in Statistics and minor in Mathematics should note the College policy
that a student may not fulfill more than half the credits for a minor from the courses counted toward
their major or majors.

253

Mathematics Courses
MATH 100 How Chance Changes the World The modern world is dominated by chance; we walk through
life speaking of hopes, fears, failures, and more in the language of statistics. In this course, we will explore
fundamental concepts in probability with an emphasis on computational examples, from apartment
hunting to computer‐generated art. We'll look at the human history of chance—especially over the 19th
and 20th centuries—to think about how we got here. We'll see that, in a life of finite spacetime but
infinitely complex problems, sometimes embracing randomness can be just what we need. But what is
chance, how do we understand it, and why? Prerequisite: Concurrent registration in IDSC 198. 6 credits; AI,
WR1, QRE; Fall; Claudio Gómez‐Gonzáles
MATH 101 Calculus with Problem Solving An introduction to the central ideas of calculus with review and
practice of those skills needed for the continued study of calculus. Problem solving strategies will be
emphasized. In addition to regular MWF class time, students will be expected to attend two problem‐
solving sessions each week, one on Monday or Tuesday, and one on Wednesday or Thursday. Details will
be provided on the first day of class. Prerequisite: Not open to students who have received credit for
Mathematics 111. 6 credits; FSR; Fall, Winter; Deanna B Haunsperger
MATH 111 Introduction to Calculus An introduction to the differential and integral calculus. Derivatives,
antiderivatives, the definite integral, applications, and the fundamental theorem of calculus. Prerequisite:
Requires placement via the Calculus Placement Exam 1, see Mathematics web page. Not open to students
who have received credit for Mathematics 101. 6 credits; FSR; Fall, Winter; McCleary A Philbin, Kate J
Meyer
MATH 120 Calculus 2 Inverse functions, integration by parts, improper integrals, modeling with differential
equations, vectors, calculus of functions of two independent variables including directional derivatives and
double integrals, Lagrange multipliers. Prerequisite: Mathematics 101, 111, score of 4 or 5 on Calculus AB
Exam or placement via a Carleton placement exam. Not open to students who have received credit for
Mathematics 211 or have a score of 4 or 5 on the AP Calculus BC exam. 6 credits; FSR; Fall, Winter, Spring;
MurphyKate Montee, Sunrose T Shrestha, Steve T Scheirer, McCleary A Philbin, Rafe F Jones
MATH 206 A Tour of Mathematics A series of eight lectures intended for students considering a
Mathematics major. The emphasis will be on presenting various striking ideas, concepts and results in
modern mathematics, rather than on developing extensive knowledge or techniques in any particular
subject area. 1 credit; S/CR/NC; NE; Winter
MATH 210 Calculus 3 Vectors, curves, calculus of functions of three independent variables, including
directional derivatives and triple integrals, cylindrical and spherical coordinates, line integrals, Green's
theorem, sequences and series, power series, Taylor series. Prerequisite: Mathematics 120. This course
cannot be substituted for Mathematics 211. 6 credits; FSR; Winter, Spring; Caroline L Turnage‐Butterbaugh,
Rob C Thompson, Steve T Scheirer
MATH 211 Introduction to Multivariable Calculus Vectors, curves, partial derivatives, gradient, multiple and
iterated integrals, line integrals, Green's theorem. Prerequisite: Score of 4 or 5 on the AP Calculus BC exam,
or placement via Calculus Placement Exam #3. 6 credits; FSR; Fall, Winter; Joseph D Johnson, Rob C
Thompson, Deanna B Haunsperger
MATH 232 Linear Algebra Linear algebra centers on the study of highly structured functions called linear
transformations. Given the abundance of nonlinear functions in mathematics, it may come as a surprise
that restricting to linear ones opens the door to a rich and powerful theory that finds applications

254
throughout mathematics, statistics, computer science, and the natural and social sciences. Linear
transformations are everywhere, once we know what to look for. They appear in calculus as the functions
that are used to define lines and planes in Euclidean space. In fact, differentiation is also a linear
transformation that takes one function to another. The course focuses on developing geometric intuition as
well as computational matrix methods. Topics include kernel and image of a linear transformation, vector
spaces, determinants, eigenvectors and eigenvalues. Prerequisite: Mathematics 120 or Mathematics 211. 6
credits; FSR; Fall, Winter, Spring; Caroline L Turnage‐Butterbaugh, Steve T Scheirer, MurphyKate Montee,
Kate J Meyer
MATH 236 Mathematical Structures Basic concepts and techniques used throughout mathematics. Topics
include logic, mathematical induction and other methods of proof, problem solving, sets, cardinality,
equivalence relations, functions and relations, and the axiom of choice. Other topics may include: algebraic
structures, graph theory, and basic combinatorics. Prerequisite: Mathematics 232 and either Mathematics
210 or Mathematics 211. 6 credits; FSR; Fall, Winter, Spring; Deanna B Haunsperger, Caroline L Turnage‐
Butterbaugh, Claudio Gómez‐Gonzáles, Sunrose T Shrestha
MATH 240 Probability (Formerly Mathematics 265) Introduction to probability and its applications. Topics
include discrete probability, random variables, independence, joint and conditional distributions,
expectation, limit laws and properties of common probability distributions. Prerequisite: Mathematics 120
or Mathematics 211. 6 credits; FSR; Fall, Winter; Katie R St. Clair, Laura M Chihara
MATH 241 Ordinary Differential Equations An introduction to ordinary differential equations, including
techniques for finding solutions, conditions under which solutions exist, and some qualitative analysis.
Prerequisite: Mathematics 232 or instructor permission. 6 credits; FSR; Fall, Winter, Spring; Kate J Meyer,
Joseph D Johnson, Rob C Thompson
MATH 244 Geometries Euclidean geometry from an advanced perspective; projective, hyperbolic, inversive,
and/or other geometries. Recommended for prospective secondary school teachers. Prerequisite:
Mathematics 236. 6 credits; FSR; Not offered 2022‐23
MATH 251 Chaotic Dynamics An exploration of the behavior of non‐linear dynamical systems. Topics
include one and two‐dimensional dynamics, Sarkovskii's Theorem, chaos, symbolic dynamics,and the Hénon
Map. Prerequisite: Mathematics 232 or instructor permission. 6 credits; FSR; Winter; Sunrose T Shrestha
MATH 261 Functions of a Complex Variable Algebra and geometry of complex numbers, analytic functions,
complex integration, series, residues, applications. Not open to students who have already received credits
for Mathematics 361. Prerequisite: Mathematics 210 or Mathematics 211. 6 credits; FSR; Spring; Paul M
Zorn
MATH 271 Computational Mathematics An introduction to mathematical ideas from numerical
approximation, scientific computing, and/or data analysis. Topics will be selected from numerical linear
algebra, numerical analysis, and optimization. Theory, implementation, and application of computational
methods will be emphasized. Prerequisite: Mathematics 232. 6 credits; FSR; Winter; Rob C Thompson
MATH 282 Elementary Theory of Numbers A first course in number number theory, covering properties of
the integers. Topics include the Euclidean algorithm, prime factorization, Diophantine equations,
congruences, divisibility, Euler’s phi function and other multiplicative functions, primitive roots, and
quadratic reciprocity. Along the way we will encounter and explore several famous unsolved problems in
number theory. If time permits, we may discuss further topics, including integers as sums of squares,

255
continued fractions, distribution of primes, Mersenne primes, the RSA cryptosystem. Prerequisite:
Mathematics 236 or instructor permission. 6 credits; FSR; Fall; Caroline L Turnage‐Butterbaugh
MATH 295 Mathematics and Democracy In a democratic society we are confronted with problems of
implementing fairness. How can we build a representative government, measure society's preferences, or
fairly divide power? Many of these problems are amenable to mathematical analysis and, in many cases,
there exist deep theories and rich historical narratives of attempts at solution. We will study three such
problems all of current political and mathematical interest: apportionment of representation, voting, and
gerrymandering. We will approach these problems by considering what abstract properties a "fair" solution
should have then attempting to construct and analyze procedures that maximize our measures of fairness.
Prerequisite: Mathematics 232 or Mathematics 236. 6 credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐23
MATH 295 Mathematics of Climate An introduction to mathematical methods for studying planetary
climate. The focus will be on low‐dimensional models, whose simplicity allows insight into fundamental
mechanisms of climate change. We will use tools from algebra, geometry, and calculus to study topics
including energy balance, greenhouse gas forcing, and ice‐albedo feedback. This course will count towards
the Applied Math area of the math major. Prerequisite: Mathematics 120 or 211. 6 credits; FSR; Not offered
2022‐23
MATH 297 Assessment and Communication of External Mathematical Activity An independent study course
intended for students who have completed an external activity related to the mathematics major (for
example, an internship or an externship) to communicate (both in written and oral forms) and assess their
mathematical learning from that activity. Prerequisite: Permission of department chair and homework in
advance of the external mathematical activity. 1 credit; S/CR/NC; NE; Fall, Winter, Spring; Katie R St. Clair
MATH 321 Real Analysis I A systematic study of concepts basic to calculus, such as topology of the real
numbers, limits, differentiation, integration, convergence of sequences, and series of functions.
Prerequisite: Mathematics 236 or instructor permission. 6 credits; FSR; Winter; Kate J Meyer
MATH 331 Real Analysis II Further topics in analysis such as measure theory, Lebesgue integration or
Banach and Hilbert spaces. Prerequisite: Mathematics 321 or instructor permission. 6 credits; FSR; Spring;
Rafe F Jones
MATH 332 Advanced Linear Algebra Selected topics beyond the material of Mathematics 232. Topics may
include the Cayley‐Hamilton theorem, the spectral theorem, factorizations, canonical forms, determinant
functions, estimation of eigenvalues, inner product spaces, dual vector spaces, unitary and Hermitian
matrices, operators, infinite‐dimensional spaces, and various applications. Prerequisite: Mathematics 236
or instructor permission. 6 credits; FSR; Not offered 2022‐23
MATH 333 Combinatorial Theory The study of structures involving finite sets. Counting techniques,
including generating functions, recurrence relations, and the inclusion‐exclusion principle; existence
criteria, including Ramsey's theorem and the pigeonhole principle. Some combinatorial identities and
bijective proofs. Other topics may include graph and/or network theory, Hall's ("marriage") theorem,
partitions, and hypergeometric series. Prerequisite: Mathematics 236 or instructor permission. 6 credits;
FSR; Not offered 2022‐23
MATH 341 Partial Differential Equations An introduction to partial differential equations with emphasis on
the heat equation, wave equation, and Laplace's equation. Topics include the method of characteristics,
separation of variables, Fourier series, Fourier transforms and existence/uniqueness of solutions.
Prerequisite: Mathematics 241. 6 credits; FSR; Spring; Joseph D Johnson

256
MATH 342 Abstract Algebra I Introduction to algebraic structures, including groups, rings, and fields.
Homomorphisms and quotient structures, polynomials, unique factorization. Other topics may include
applications such as Burnside's counting theorem, symmetry groups, polynomial equations, or geometric
constructions. Prerequisite: Mathematics 236 or instructor permission. 6 credits; FSR; Fall, Spring; Claudio
Gómez‐Gonzáles, MurphyKate Montee
MATH 344 Differential Geometry Local and global theory of curves, Frenet formulas. Local theory of
surfaces, normal curvature, geodesics, Gaussian and mean curvatures, Theorema Egregium. Prerequisite:
Mathematics 236 or permission of the instructor. 6 credits; FSR; Fall; Rob C Thompson
MATH 349 Methods of Teaching Mathematics Methods of teaching mathematics in grades 7‐12. Issues in
contemporary mathematics education. Regular visits to school classrooms and teaching a class are
required. Prerequisite: Junior or senior standing and instructor permission. 6 credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐
23
MATH 352 Topics in Abstract Algebra An intensive study of one or more of the types of algebraic systems
studied in Mathematics 342. Prerequisite: Mathematics 342. 6 credits; FSR; Winter; Claudio Gómez‐
Gonzáles
MATH 354 Topology An introduction to the study of topological spaces. We develop concepts from point‐
set and algebraic topology in order to distinguish between different topological spaces up to
homeomorphism. Topics include methods of construction of topological spaces; continuity, connectedness,
compactness, Hausdorff condition; fundamental group, homotopy of maps. Prerequisite: Mathematics 236
or instructor permission. 6 credits; FSR; Not offered 2022‐23
MATH 361 Complex Analysis The theoretical foundations for the calculus of functions of a complex variable.
Prerequisite: Mathematics 321 or instructor permission. Students who have already received credit for
Mathematics 261 may only take this course with instructor permission. 6 credits; FSR; Not offered 2022‐23
MATH 395 Geometric Group Theory Geometric group theory is the study of (infinite) groups using
geometric tools. The underlying principle of geometric group theory is that if a group G acts "nicely" on a
space, then information about that space tells us information about the group. This class will introduce
tools from topology, graph theory, and geometry and use them to study groups. Topics will include groups
acting on trees and (more generally) hyperbolic groups. This course counts toward the Algebra area of the
math major. Prerequisite: Mathematics 342 or instructor consent. 6 credits; FSR; Fall; MurphyKate Montee
MATH 395 Introduction to Analytic Number Theory An introduction to the techniques and principles of
analytic number theory. Topics covered include arithmetical functions, Dirichlet multiplication, averages of
arithmetical functions, elementary theorems on the distribution of the primes, and Dirichlet's theorem on
primes in arithmetic progressions. Prerequisite: Mathematics 282 (formerly MATH 312) or Mathematics
342. 6 credits; FSR; Spring; Caroline L Turnage‐Butterbaugh
MATH 400 Integrative Exercise Either a supervised small‐group research project or an individual,
independent reading. Required of all senior majors. Prerequisite: Mathematics 236 and successful
completion of three courses from among: Mathematics courses numbered above 236, Computer Science
252, Computer Science 254, Computer Science 352, Statistics 250, Statistics 320, Statistics 340. 3 credits;
S/NC; Fall, Winter, Spring; Deanna B Haunsperger, Rob C Thompson, Caroline L Turnage‐Butterbaugh,
Claudio Gómez‐Gonzáles, Joseph D Johnson, Sunrose T Shrestha

257

Statistics Courses
STAT 120 Introduction to Statistics (Formerly MATH 215) Introduction to statistics and data analysis.
Practical aspects of statistics, including extensive use of statistical software, interpretation and
communication of results, will be emphasized. Topics include: exploratory data analysis, correlation and
linear regression, design of experiments, basic probability, the normal distribution, randomization approach
to inference, sampling distributions, estimation, hypothesis testing, and two‐way tables. Students who have
taken Mathematics 211 are encouraged to consider the more advanced Mathematics 240/Statistics 250
(formerly Mathematics 265 and 275) Probability/Statistical Inference sequence. Prerequisite: Not open to
students who have already received credit for Psychology 200/201, Sociology/Anthropology 239 or
Statistics 250 (formerly Mathematics 275). 6 credits; FSR, QRE; Fall, Winter, Spring; Andy N Poppick, Claire E
Kelling, Deepak Bastola, Katie R St. Clair, Adam Loy
STAT 220 Introduction to Data Science (Formerly Mathematics 285) This course will cover the
computational side of data analysis, including data acquisition, management, and visualization tools. Topics
may include: data scraping, data wrangling, data visualization using packages such as ggplots, interactive
graphics using tools such as Shiny, supervised and unsupervised classification methods, and understanding
and visualizing spatial data. We will use the statistics software R in this course. Prerequisite: Statistics 120
(formerly Mathematics 215), Statistics 230 (formerly Mathematics 245) or Statistics 250 (formerly
Mathematics 275). 6 credits; FSR, QRE; Fall, Winter, Spring; Deepak Bastola, Adam Loy
STAT 230 Applied Regression Analysis (Formerly Mathematics 245) A second course in statistics covering
simple linear regression, multiple regression and ANOVA, and logistic regression. Exploratory graphical
methods, model building and model checking techniques will be emphasized with extensive use of
statistical software to analyze real‐life data. Prerequisite: Statistics 120 (formerly Mathematics 215),
Statistics 250 (formerly Mathematics 275), Psychology 200, or AP Statistics Exam score of 4 or 5. 6 credits;
FSR, QRE; Fall, Winter, Spring; Adam Loy, Claire E Kelling, Laura M Chihara
STAT 250 Introduction to Statistical Inference (Formerly Mathematics 275) Introduction to modern
mathematical statistics. The mathematics underlying fundamental statistical concepts will be covered as
well as applications of these ideas to real‐life data. Topics include: resampling methods (permutation tests,
bootstrap intervals), classical methods (parametric hypothesis tests and confidence intervals), parameter
estimation, goodness‐of‐fit tests, regression, and Bayesian methods. The statistical package R will be used
to analyze data sets. Prerequisite: Mathematics 240 Probability (formerly Mathematics 265). 6 credits; FSR,
QRE; Winter, Spring; Katie R St. Clair, Andy N Poppick
STAT 260 Introduction to Sampling Techniques (Formerly MATH 255) Covers sampling design issues beyond
the basic simple random sample: stratification, clustering, domains, and complex designs like two‐phase
and multistage designs. Inference and estimation techniques for most of these designs will be covered and
the idea of sampling weights for a survey will be introduced. We may also cover topics like graphing
complex survey data and exploring relationships in complex survey data using regression and chi‐square
tests. Prerequisite: Statistics 120 (formerly Mathematics 215), Statistics 230 (formerly Mathematics 245), or
Statistics 250 (formerly Mathematics 275). 6 credits; FSR, QRE; Not offered 2022‐23
STAT 285 Statistical Consulting (Formerly MATH 280) Students will apply their statistical knowledge by
analyzing data problems solicited from the Northfield community. Students will also learn basic consulting
skills, including communication and ethics. Prerequisite: Statistics 230 (formerly Mathematics 245) and
instructor permission. 2 credits; S/CR/NC; FSR, QRE; Fall, Winter, Spring; Andy N Poppick

258
STAT 297 Assessment and Communication of External Statistical Activity An independent study course
intended for students who have completed an external activity related to the statistics major (for example,
an internship or an externship) to communicate (both in written and oral forms) and assess their statistical
learning from that activity. Prerequisite: Permission of department chair and homework in advance of the
external statistical activity. 1 credit; S/CR/NC; Fall, Winter; Katie R St. Clair
STAT 310 Spatial Statistics Spatial data is becoming increasingly available in a wide range of disciplines,
including social sciences such as political science and criminology, as well as natural sciences such as
geosciences and ecology. This course will introduce methods for exploring and analyzing spatial data.
Methods will be covered to describe and analyze three main types of spatial data: areal, point process, and
point‐referenced (geostatistical) data. The course will also extensively cover tools for working with spatial
data in R. The goals are that by the end of the course, students will be able to read, explore, plot, and
describe spatial data in R, determine appropriate methods for analyzing a given spatial dataset, and work
with their own spatial dataset(s) in R and derive conclusions about an application through statistical
inference. Prerequisite: Statistics 230 (formerly MATH 245) and Statistics 250 (formerly MATH 275). 6
credits; FSR, QRE; Spring; Claire E Kelling
STAT 320 Time Series Analysis (Formerly MATH 315) Models and methods for characterizing dependence in
data that are ordered in time. Emphasis on univariate, quantitative data observed over evenly spaced
intervals. Topics include perspectives from both the time domain (e.g., autoregressive and moving average
models, and their extensions) and the frequency domain (e.g., periodogram smoothing and parametric
models for the spectral density). Prerequisite: Statistics 230 and 250 (formerly Mathematics 245 and 275).
Exposure to matrix algebra may be helpful but is not required. 6 credits; FSR, QRE; Not offered 2022‐23
STAT 330 Advanced Statistical Modeling (Formerly MATH 315) Topics include linear mixed effects models
for repeated measures, longitudinal or hierarchical data and generalized linear models (of which logistic
and Poisson regression are special cases) including zero‐inflated Poisson models. Depending on time,
additional topics could include survival analysis, generalized additive models or models for spatial data.
Prerequisite: Statistics 230 and 250 (formerly Mathematics 245 and 275) or permission of the instructor. 6
credits; FSR, QRE; Winter; Laura M Chihara
STAT 340 Bayesian Statistics Formerly MATH 315) An introduction to statistical inference and modeling
in the Bayesian paradigm. Topics include Bayes’ Theorem, common prior and posterior distributions,
hierarchical models, Markov chain Monte Carlo methods (e.g., the Metropolis‐Hastings algorithm and Gibbs
sampler) and model adequacy and posterior predictive checks. The course uses R extensively for
simulations. Prerequisite: Statistics 250 (formerly Mathematics 275). 6 credits; FSR, QRE; Fall; Adam Loy
STAT 400 Integrative Exercise Either a supervised small‐group research project or an individual,
independent reading. Required of all senior majors. Prerequisite: Senior Statistics major. Students are
strongly encouraged to complete Statistics 230 (formerly Mathematics 245) and Statistics 250 (formerly
Mathematics 275) before starting this course. 3 credits; S/NC; Fall, Winter, Spring; Deepak Bastola, Katie R
St. Clair, Claire E Kelling, Adam Loy

Medieval and Renaissance Studies
The Medieval and Renaissance Studies Minor encourages students interested in the cultures and
polities that flourished from (ca. 250-CE-1700) to deepen their understanding of these worlds
through an interdisciplinary program of study. Heirs to ancient empires and creators of complex

259

cultures, societies in northern Europe, the Mediterranean Basin, and areas of Asia and Africa offer
fascinating opportunities to watch communities and cultures coping with timeless problems of
power, identity, meaning and belief. Students explore these topics through written, archaeological,
material, and visual evidence in pursuit of a rich, multi-dimensional understanding of other peoples
and other worlds.
The minor is open to students in ANY major who wish to expand their knowledge of this important
and fascinating period of human history and all of the cultures and connections that contributed.
A total of 42 credits (usually 7 courses) is required for the minor: 18 credits in "Core" courses, 18
credits in "Supporting" courses; and a capstone seminar. In addition to the capstone seminars listed
below, students may count--with prior approval of both the course instructor and the minor
coordinators--another advanced course (at the 200 or 300 level) as a capstone course provided that
the minor pursues a substantial interdisciplinary research project on a topic within the period
covered by the minor.
Optional Off-Campus Programs: Off-campus study can be an important part of the minor. Students
interested in study abroad as part of the concentration are advised to consult with their academic
advisers in deciding when to go off-campus and with the minor coordinators to discuss the range of
programs available and potential programs of study. Courses taken abroad may count for up to two
"core" courses (12 credits) and two "supporting courses" (12 credits).
Requirements for the Medieval and Renaissance Studies Minor
Core Courses (3 courses/18 credits required):






















ARBC 185 The Creation of Classical Arabic Literature (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARCN 246 Archaeological Methods & Lab
ARTH 101 Introduction to Art History I
ARTH 102 Introduction to Art History II
ARTH 155 Islamic Art and Architecture
ARTH 235 Revival, Revelation, and Re‐animation: The Art of Europe's "Renaissance" (not offered in
2022‐23)
ARTH 255 Islam in the Eyes of the West (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARTH 263 European Architectural Studies Program: Prehistory to Postmodernism (not offered in
2022‐23)
ARTH 321 Arts of the Chinese Scholar's Studio (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARTH 324 The Sexuality of Jesus Christ
CLAS 124 Roman Archaeology and Art (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 114 Introduction to Medieval Narrative
ENGL 144 Shakespeare I
ENGL 203 Other Worlds of Medieval English Literature (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 210 From Chaucer to Milton: Early English Literature (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 216 Milton
ENGL 244 Shakespeare I
ENGL 278 London Program: Shakespeare's England (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 285 Textual Technologies from Parchment to Pixel (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 310 Shakespeare II (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 100 Confucius and His Critics

260
































HIST 131 Saints and Society in Late Antiquity
HIST 133 Crisis, Creativity, and Transformation in Late Antiquity (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 135 Making and Breaking Institutions in the Middle Ages: Structure, Culture, Corruption, and
Reform (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 137 Early Medieval Worlds in Transformation (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 138 Crusades, Mission, and the Expansion of Europe (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 139 Foundations of Modern Europe (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 150 Politics of Art in Early Imperial China
HIST 201 Rome Program: Building Power and Piety in Medieval Italy, CE 300‐1150
HIST 206 Rome Program: The Eternal City in Time: Structure, Change, and Identity
HIST 231 Mapping the World Before Mercator
HIST 232 Renaissance Worlds in France and Italy (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 233 The Byzantine World and Its Neighbors, 750‐ca. 1453 (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 238 The Viking World (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 243 The Peasants are Revolting! Society and Politics in the Making of Modern France (not
offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 245 Ireland: Land, Conflict and Memory (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 289 Gender and Ethics in Late Medieval France
HIST 331 Regional States: Boundaries and Horizons in Fourteenth‐century Italy (not offered in 2022‐
23)
HIST 332 Image Makers and Breakers in the Premodern World (not offered in 2022‐23)
LATN 243 Medieval Latin (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 111 Introduction to the Qu’ran
RELG 122 Introduction to Islam (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 162 Jesus, the Bible, and Christian Beginnings (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 231 From Luther to Kierkegaard (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 234 Angels, Demons, and Evil
RELG 275 Death, Heaven, and Hell (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 278 Semantics of Love in Sufism
RELG 282 Samurai: Ethics of Death and Loyalty (not offered in 2022‐23)
SPAN 227 Muslims, Christians, and Jews in Early Modern Spain (not offered in 2022‐23)
SPAN 301 Greek and Christian Tragedy (not offered in 2022‐23)
SPAN 318 Islamic Spain
SPAN 330 The Invention of the Modern Novel: Cervantes' Don Quijote

Supporting Courses (18 credits required):
Note: all courses listed as "core courses" also qualify as "supporting courses."












ARBC 185 The Creation of Classical Arabic Literature (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARBC 315 Readings in Premodern Arabic Anthologies
ARBC 387 The One Thousand and One Nights (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARCN 111 Archaeology of the Americas (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARCN 211 Coercion and Exploitation: Material Histories of Labor
ARCN 222 Experimental Archaeology and Experiential History
ARCN 246 Archaeological Methods & Lab
ARCN 395 Archaeology: Science, Ethics, Nationalism and Cultural Property (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARTH 100 Witches, Monsters and Demons
ARTH 101 Introduction to Art History I
ARTH 102 Introduction to Art History II

261














































ARTH 155 Islamic Art and Architecture
ARTH 165 Japanese Art and Culture (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARTH 166 Chinese Art and Culture
ARTH 209 Chinese Painting (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARTH 235 Revival, Revelation, and Re‐animation: The Art of Europe's "Renaissance" (not offered in
2022‐23)
ARTH 236 Baroque Art (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARTH 255 Islam in the Eyes of the West (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARTH 263 European Architectural Studies Program: Prehistory to Postmodernism (not offered in
2022‐23)
ARTH 323 Idolatry (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARTH 324 The Sexuality of Jesus Christ
ARTS 117 Living London Program: Visualizing Renaissance England (not offered in 2022‐23)
CLAS 124 Roman Archaeology and Art (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 114 Introduction to Medieval Narrative
ENGL 144 Shakespeare I
ENGL 203 Other Worlds of Medieval English Literature (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 207 Princes. Poets. Power (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 208 The Faerie Queene (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 209 The Merchant of Venice: A Project Course
ENGL 210 From Chaucer to Milton: Early English Literature (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 213 Christopher Marlowe (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 214 Revenge Tragedy
ENGL 219 Global Shakespeare
ENGL 244 Shakespeare I
ENGL 278 London Program: Shakespeare's England (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 310 Shakespeare II (not offered in 2022‐23)
EUST 111 The Age of Cathedrals (not offered in 2022‐23)
GEOL 245 “When the Earth Shook…” Earthquakes in Human History and Lab (not offered in 2022‐
23)
HIST 131 Saints and Society in Late Antiquity
HIST 133 Crisis, Creativity, and Transformation in Late Antiquity (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 137 Early Medieval Worlds in Transformation (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 138 Crusades, Mission, and the Expansion of Europe (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 139 Foundations of Modern Europe (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 201 Rome Program: Building Power and Piety in Medieval Italy, CE 300‐1150
HIST 206 Rome Program: The Eternal City in Time: Structure, Change, and Identity
HIST 231 Mapping the World Before Mercator
HIST 232 Renaissance Worlds in France and Italy (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 233 The Byzantine World and Its Neighbors, 750‐ca. 1453 (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 238 The Viking World (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 243 The Peasants are Revolting! Society and Politics in the Making of Modern France (not
offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 245 Ireland: Land, Conflict and Memory (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 246 Making Early Medieval England
HIST 288 Reason, Authority, and Love in Medieval France (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 289 Gender and Ethics in Late Medieval France
HIST 331 Regional States: Boundaries and Horizons in Fourteenth‐century Italy (not offered in 2022‐
23)
HIST 332 Image Makers and Breakers in the Premodern World (not offered in 2022‐23)

262































IDSC 150 Plague, War and Crisis: Reading Hobbes Reading Thucydides, Books 1‐2: Plague and
Democracy (not offered in 2022‐23)
IDSC 151 Plague, War, Crisis: Reading Hobbes Reading Thucydides: Books 3‐5 Revolt and Revolution
(not offered in 2022‐23)
IDSC 152 Plague, War, Crisis: Reading Hobbes Reading Thucydides: Books 6‐8 Catastrophe and Coup
(not offered in 2022‐23)
LATN 233 The Catilinarian Conspiracy (not offered in 2022‐23)
LATN 234 Julius Caesar: the Gallic and Civil Wars (not offered in 2022‐23)
LATN 255 Biography, History, and Empire in Tacitus’ Agricola
PHIL 113 The Individual and the Political Community (not offered in 2022‐23)
PHIL 270 Ancient Philosophy
PHIL 272 Early Modern Philosophy: Seventeenth and Eighteenth Century Philosophy
POSC 250 Kings, Tyrants, Philosophers: Plato's Republic (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 254 Freedom, Excellence, Happiness: Aristotle's Ethics (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 111 Introduction to the Qu’ran
RELG 120 Introduction to Judaism (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 121 Introduction to Christianity
RELG 122 Introduction to Islam (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 152 Religions in Japanese Culture
RELG 153 Introduction to Buddhism
RELG 155 Hinduism: An Introduction
RELG 231 From Luther to Kierkegaard (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 233 Gender and Power in the Catholic Church
RELG 236 History of Antisemitism (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 242 Oh My G*d: Christianity and Sexual Revolutions (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 275 Death, Heaven, and Hell (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 278 Semantics of Love in Sufism
RELG 287 Many Marys (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 322 Apocalypse How? (not offered in 2022‐23)
SPAN 227 Muslims, Christians, and Jews in Early Modern Spain (not offered in 2022‐23)
SPAN 301 Greek and Christian Tragedy (not offered in 2022‐23)
SPAN 330 The Invention of the Modern Novel: Cervantes' Don Quijote
THEA 195 Acting Shakespeare (not offered in 2022‐23)

Capstone Seminars (6 credits required):
Please consult with Program Coordinator regarding the Capstone Seminar/Project Requirement)








ARCN 395 Archaeology: Science, Ethics, Nationalism and Cultural Property (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 331 Regional States: Boundaries and Horizons in Fourteenth‐century Italy (not offered in 2022‐
23)
HIST 332 Image Makers and Breakers in the Premodern World (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 322 Apocalypse How? (not offered in 2022‐23)
SPAN 301 Greek and Christian Tragedy (not offered in 2022‐23)
SPAN 318 Islamic Spain
SPAN 330 The Invention of the Modern Novel: Cervantes' Don Quijote

Middle East Studies Minor

263

Through the Middle East Studies Minor students can develop an inter-connected understanding of
diverse Middle Eastern cultures and societies, past and present, in regional and global contexts. We
define the Middle East broadly to include the majority-Arabic-speaking states and territories from
Morocco to the Persian Gulf, Israel, Turkey, Iran, and Central Asia. Our interdisciplinary approach
will also help students to explore linguistic, literary, religious, and other sociocultural ties with
Middle Eastern diasporas in Europe and the Americas, and with those regions in Sub-Saharan
Africa where Arabic serves as language of literature and culture.
Requirements for the Middle East Studies Minor
The Middle East Studies Minor requires a total of 45 credits. No more than 24 credits may be from
any one department. Outside of these 45 credits, students must also complete either Hebrew 204 or
Arabic 205, or equivalent, or fulfill their Carleton language requirement with another language
relevant to the Middle East (with director's approval).
45 credits completed as follows:


Foundations Courses: 12 credits from the following list, no credits from OCS programs may
substitute. Once you have fulfilled the core requirement, further courses from among these five
may serve as electives.
o ARBC 144 Arabic Literature at War (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ARBC 185 The Creation of Classical Arabic Literature (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ARTH 155 Islamic Art and Architecture
o HIST 165 From Young Turks to Arab Revolutions: A Cultural History of the Modern Middle
East (not offered in 2022‐23)
o MELA 121 East‐West in Israeli and Palestinian Fiction and Film (not offered in 2022‐23)
o POSC 242 Middle East Politics (not offered in 2022‐23)
o RELG 120 Introduction to Judaism (not offered in 2022‐23)
o RELG 122 Introduction to Islam (not offered in 2022‐23)
o RELG 161 The Jewish Bible (not offered in 2022‐23)
o RELG 162 Jesus, the Bible, and Christian Beginnings (not offered in 2022‐23)
and any new 100‐level classes being taught by tenured, tenure‐track or continuing faculty at the
committee's discretion.



Supporting Courses: 30 credits from among the following two groups, with a minimum of 12 in
each. Up to 12 credits from approved OCS programs may count toward this total (with MES director
approval), but these must be from OCS courses with a content focus (not just language instruction).
Group 1, History, Social Sciences, Religion (12 credit minimum)
o AFST 130 Global Islam and Blackness (not offered in 2022‐23)
o ARCN 395 Archaeology: Science, Ethics, Nationalism and Cultural Property (not offered in
2022‐23)
o CLAS 122 The Archaeology of Mediterranean Prehistory: From the Beginning to the
Classical Age (not offered in 2022‐23)
o HIST 131 Saints and Society in Late Antiquity
o HIST 133 Crisis, Creativity, and Transformation in Late Antiquity (not offered in 2022‐23)
o HIST 138 Crusades, Mission, and the Expansion of Europe (not offered in 2022‐23)
o HIST 233 The Byzantine World and Its Neighbors, 750‐ca. 1453 (not offered in 2022‐23)
o HIST 260 The Making of the Modern Middle East (not offered in 2022‐23)

264
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o

HIST 265 Central Asia in the Modern Age
HIST 284 History, Culture and Commerce Program: Heritage in Africa and Arabia (not
offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 285 History, Culture and Commerce Program: Critical Historical Research (not offered
in 2022‐23)
HIST 360 Muslims and Modernity
POSC 235 The Endless War on Terror
POSC 282 Terrorism and Counterterrorism
POSC 324 Rebels and Risk Takers: Women and War in the Middle East* (not offered in
2022‐23)
RELG 161 The Jewish Bible (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 162 Jesus, the Bible, and Christian Beginnings (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 221 Judaism and Gender (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 236 History of Antisemitism (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 264 Islamic Politics (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 285 Islam in America: Race, Religion and Politics (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 322 Apocalypse How? (not offered in 2022‐23)
SOAN 151 Global Minnesota: An Anthropology of Our State (not offered in 2022‐23)
SOAN 263 Terrorism (not offered in 2022‐23)

Group 2, Literature, Culture, and the Arts (12 credits minimum)
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o


ARBC 144 Arabic Literature at War (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARBC 185 The Creation of Classical Arabic Literature (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARBC 206 Arabic in Cultural Context
ARBC 212 Colloquial Egyptian Arabic (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARBC 222 Music in the Middle East
ARBC 223 Arab Music Workshop
ARBC 245 Modern Arab Environments (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARBC 310 Advanced Media Arabic (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARBC 315 Readings in Premodern Arabic Anthologies
ARBC 387 The One Thousand and One Nights (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARTH 155 Islamic Art and Architecture
ARTH 255 Islam in the Eyes of the West (not offered in 2022‐23)
CAMS 236 Israeli Society in Israeli Cinema (not offered in 2022‐23)
CCST 100 Cross Cultural Perspectives on Israeli and Palestinian Identity
FREN 350 Middle East and French Connection (not offered in 2022‐23)
FREN 360 The Algerian War of Liberation and Its Representations (not offered in 2022‐23)
MELA 121 East‐West in Israeli and Palestinian Fiction and Film (not offered in 2022‐23)
MELA 230 Jewish Collective Memory
RELG 210 The Arts of Islam (not offered in 2022‐23)
SPAN 318 Islamic Spain

Capstone MEST 395, Senior Colloquium, 3 credits

Middle East Studies Courses
MEST 395 Middle East Studies Capstone The Middle East Studies capstone will allow students to reflect
upon their experiences with Middle East studies, including on‐campus and off‐campus classwork,

265
internships, and cross‐cultural experiences, and to synthesize their work in the minor. The course will
involve selected readings from a number of disciplinary perspectives and it will culminate in a final oral
presentation on a project that brings together each student’s work in Middle East Studies at Carleton.
Prerequisite: Middle East Studies minor. 3 credits; NE; Spring; Adeeb Khalid

Middle Eastern Languages
The Department of Middle Eastern Languages offers introductory, intermediate, and advanced
courses in Arabic and Hebrew language, and a variety of courses in classical and modern Arabic
and modern Hebrew literature, mostly in English translation. We also offer courses in Israeli and
wider Jewish history and culture.
Requirements for the Arabic Minor
In order to receive the minor in Arabic students shall satisfactorily complete 36 credits beyond 204,
in the following distribution: at least twenty-four credits in Arabic language, and at least 6 credits
from among the department of Middle Eastern Languages' offerings in Arabic literature and/or
culture in translation. No more than twelve credits from off-campus Arabic language study may be
applied toward the minor.
Arabic Courses (ARBC)
ARBC 101 Elementary Arabic This is the first course in the Elementary Arabic sequence. This sequence
introduces non‐Arabic speakers to the sounds, script, and basic grammar of Arabic‐the language of 200
million speakers in the Arab world and the liturgical language of over a billion Muslims. Students will
develop basic listening, speaking, reading and writing skills in Modern Standard Arabic. Classes will
incorporate readings and audio‐visual material from contemporary Arabic media, as well as popular music.
6 credits; NE; Fall; Zaki A Haidar
ARBC 102 Elementary Arabic This course sequence introduces non‐Arabic speakers to the sounds, script,
and basic grammar of Arabic‐‐the language of 200 million speakers in the Arab world and the liturgical
language of over a billion Muslims. Students will develop basic listening, speaking, reading and writing skills
in Modern Standard Arabic. Classes will incorporate readings and audio‐visual material from contemporary
Arabic media, as well as popular music. Prerequisite: Arabic 101 or equivalent. 6 credits; NE; Winter; Zaki A
Haidar
ARBC 103 Elementary Arabic This course sequence introduces non‐Arabic speakers to the sounds, script,
and basic grammar of Arabic‐‐the language of 200 million speakers in the Arab world and the liturgical
language of over a billion Muslims. Students will develop basic listening, speaking, reading and writing skills
in Modern Standard Arabic. Classes will incorporate readings and audio‐visual material from contemporary
Arabic media, as well as popular music. Prerequisite: Arabic 102 or equivalent. 6 credits; NE; Spring; Zaki A
Haidar
ARBC 144 Arabic Literature at War Arabic literature is a vibrant and humane tradition. At the same time,
several Arab societies have experienced periods of exceedingly violent conflict throughout the twentieth
and into the twenty‐first centuries. In this course, we will investigate the ways these two currents—war and
the literary—converge in several Arab societies. As members of societies at war, but also as literary artists,

266
how do authors represent these conflicting narratives? What sorts of war stories do they tell, how do they
tell them, and what sort of literary practice is produced? We will study the birth of the Lebanese Civil War
novel as a bona fide genre in the 1970s and 80s, how literature informed anti‐colonial struggles in Palestine
and Algeria from the 1950s to the present, and read some works of genre‐bending horror and science
fiction that have appeared in the wake of Iraq’s recent destruction. Taught in English, no knowledge of
Arabic is required. 6 credits; LA, WR2, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
ARBC 151 Spoken Egyptian Arabic Egyptian Arabic is the spoken dialect used in daily life in Egypt, the
vernacular of Arab cinema and media, and the lyrical backbone of most modern Arab music. It is, thus,
central to the cultural life of Egypt and the wider Arab world. Given this wide diffusion of Egyptian Arabic,
learning to communicate in Egyptian Arabic opens doors across the Arabophone world. In this course,
students with no prior Arabic language experience will build oral proficiency using instruction in the forms
and vocabulary of spoken Egyptian, but also through a use of a variety of media, including films, songs, and
other contemporary materials. Please note: This class is intended for students with a general interest in
Arabic, who did not study Arabic before. It is not open to students who have had prior classroom
experience with the Arabic language. Prerequisite: Not open to students who have had prior classroom
experience with the Arabic language. 6 credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐23
ARBC 185 The Creation of Classical Arabic Literature In this course we will explore the emergence of Arabic
literature in one of the most exciting and important periods in the history of Islam and the Arab world; a
time in which pre‐Islamic Arabian lore was combined with translated Persian wisdom literature and Greek
scientific and philosophical writings to form the canon of learning of the new emerged Arab‐Islamic empire.
We will explore some of the different literary genres that emerged in the New Arab courts and urban
centers: from wine and love poetry, historical and humorous anecdotes, to the Thousand and One Nights,
and discuss the socio‐historical forces and institutions that shaped them. All readings are in English. No
Arabic knowledge required. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
ARBC 204 Intermediate Arabic In this course sequence students will continue to develop their reading,
writing, listening and speaking skills, while building a solid foundation of Arabic grammar (morphology and
syntax). Students will develop their ability to express ideas in Modern Standard Arabic by writing essays and
preparing oral presentations. Classes will incorporate readings and audio‐visual material from
contemporary Arabic media, as well as popular music. Prerequisite: Arabic 103 or equivalent. 6 credits; NE;
Fall; Zaki A Haidar
ARBC 205 Intermediate Arabic In this course sequence students will continue to develop their reading,
writing, listening and speaking skills, while building a solid foundation of Arabic grammar (morphology and
syntax). Students will develop their ability to express ideas in Modern Standard Arabic by writing essays and
preparing oral presentations. Classes will incorporate readings and audio‐visual material from
contemporary Arabic media, as well as popular music. Prerequisite: Arabic 204 or equivalent. 6 credits; NE;
Winter; Zaki A Haidar
ARBC 206 Arabic in Cultural Context In this course students will continue to develop their Arabic language
skills, including expanding their command of Arabic grammar, improving their listening comprehension,
reading and writing skills. In addition to more language‐focused training, the course will introduce students
to more advanced readings, including literary texts (prose and poetry, classical and modern) and op‐ed
articles from current media. Class discussions will be in Arabic. Prerequisite: Arabic 205 or equivalent. 6
credits; NE; Spring; Zaki A Haidar

267
ARBC 211 Colloquial Levantine Arabic In this course we will focus on acquiring conversational and listening
comprehension skills, and building vocabulary in the Levantine/Shami dialect of spoken Arabic, spoken
throughout bilad al‐Sham or "Greater Syria." Building upon the foundation of Modern Standard Arabic, we
will focus upon points of grammatical and semantic convergence and divergence, and work to develop
strategies for fluidly navigating our way between and within these two linguistic registers. We will study the
language systematically, but we will also incorporate a range of written and audiovisual materials‐‐music,
films, television and web series‐‐as well as other popular culture from the region. Prerequisite: Arabic 204
or equivalent. 6 credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐23
ARBC 212 Colloquial Egyptian Arabic In this course we will focus on acquiring conversational and listening
comprehension skills, and building vocabulary in Egyptian Arabic, the spoken dialect of Egypt and one of the
most widely understood dialects across the Arab world. Building upon the foundation of Modern Standard
Arabic, we will focus upon points of grammatical and semantic convergence and divergence, and work to
develop strategies for fluidly navigating our ways between and within these two linguistic registers. We will
study the language systematically, but we will also incorporate a range of written and audiovisual
materials‐‐music, films, television and web series‐‐as well as other popular culture from the region.
Prerequisite: Arabic 205 or equivalent. 6 credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐23
ARBC 222 Music in the Middle East The Middle East is home to a great number of musical styles, genres,
and traditions. Regional, ideological, and cultural diversity, national identity, and cross‐cultural encounters‐‐
all express themselves in music. We will explore some of the many musical traditions in the Arab world,
from early twentieth century to the present. Class discussions based on readings in English and guided
listening. No prior music knowledge required, but interested students with or without musical background
can participate in an optional, hands‐on Arab music performance workshop, on Western or a few
(provided) Middle Eastern instruments throughout the term. 6 credits; LA, IS; Spring; Yaron Klein
ARBC 223 Arab Music Workshop Through music making, this workshop introduces students to Arab music
and some of its distinctive features, such as microtonality, modality (maqam), improvisation (taqsim) and
rhythmic patterns (iqa'at). Students may elect to participate playing on an instrument they already play, or
elect to study the oud (the Arab lute). Ouds and percussion instruments will be provided. Prerequisite:
Concurrent enrollment in Arabic 222. 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Spring; Yaron Klein
ARBC 231 Classical Arabic Literature (adab) in the Making This introductory course to Classical Arabic
Literature will focus on the emergence and formation of Medieval Arabic belles‐lettres (adab). We will read
excerpts from adab literature (in translation), and discuss the socio‐historical forces and institutions that
shaped it: the rise of the urban elite in Abba sid Baghdad, the patronage supporting scholars, the
intellectual gatherings of scholars (the majlis), the book shop, as well as the introduction of paper. We will
discuss which materials were admitted into adab, and which were left out (e.g.: A Thousand and One
Nights). In translation. 6 credits; Not offered 2022‐23
ARBC 245 Modern Arab Environments In this course we will study representations of the environment in
modern Arab culture, across the media of film and literature. In our approach to Egyptian culture we will
study depictions of the exemplary space of the cityscape and the village, and their entanglement with
myths of nation. In the film and fiction of North Africa and the Persian Gulf we will explore representations
of the desert, and a literary and visual approach that defies the typical casting of arid spaces as barren. We
will explore how works from Palestine, Iraq, and Lebanon envision the relationship of their societies to the
mountain and sea. Through our close study of Arab fictions we will think about how environments have
shaped those societies, and how members of those societies have made claims of their own about and

268
upon their surroundings. In translation, no Arabic required. All course readings will be in English. 6 credits;
LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
ARBC 286 Narratives of Arab Modernity In this course, we will read formative works of modern Arabic
literature from Iraq, Egypt, Lebanon, Syria and Palestine. We will trace the processes of societal and literary
transformation, from the texts of the nahda or Arabic literary and intellectual renaissance, to contemporary
works written in the era of Arab "springs" and revolutions. We will approach these literary texts‐‐poetry,
fiction, and graphic novels‐‐ as works of literature with aesthetic claims upon us as readers, even as we
treat the contentious relationship between the literary and the political in a period marked by colonialism,
nationalism, war, revolution, Islamism and secularism. All readings are in English. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not
offered 2022‐23
ARBC 310 Advanced Media Arabic Readings of excerpts from the Arabic press and listening to news
editions, commentaries and other radio and TV programs from across the Arab world. Emphasis is on
vocabulary expansion, text comprehension strategies, and further development of reading and listening
comprehension. Class includes oral discussions and regular written assignments in Arabic. Prerequisite:
Arabic 206 or equivalent. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
ARBC 315 Readings in Premodern Arabic Anthologies The concept of adab as the liberal arts education of
the premodern Arab world presents itself most vividly in the adab anthology. Authors writing in this genre
collected and classified the knowledge of their time, drawing on material from a large variety of disciplines:
literature (poetic, proverbial, historical‐anecdotal), Religion (Quran, prophetic tradition, jurisprudence,
theology), linguistics, as well as philosophy and the sciences. This encyclopedic genre represented the ideal
of a broad‐based erudition, and the perception that education should be entertaining as it is edifying. In
this class we will read excerpts from the works of some of the major premodern anthology writers: Ibn Abd
Rabbihi, Abu l‐Faraj al‐Isfahani, al‐Ibshihi and al‐Nuwayri. Prerequisite: Arabic 206 or equivalent. 3 credits;
LA, IS; Spring; Yaron Klein
ARBC 371 Readings in Premodern Arabic Science It is difficult to overstate Arab scientists' contribution to
science. A translation movement from Greek, Persian and Sanskrit into Arabic initiated in the eighth
century, led to centuries of innovative scientific investigation, during which Arab scientists reshaped science
in a variety of disciplines: from mathematics to astronomy, physics, optics and medicine. Many of their
works entered Latin and the European curriculum during the Renaissance. In this reading course we will
explore some of the achievements and thought processes in premodern Arabic scientific literature by
reading selections from several seminal works. We will examine these in the cultural contexts in which they
emerged and to which they contributed, and reflect on modern Western perceptions of this intellectual
project. Readings and class discussions will be in both Arabic and English. Prerequisite: Arabic 206 or
equivalent. 3 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
ARBC 387 The One Thousand and One Nights This course is an exploration of the world of the Thousand
and One Nights, the most renowned Arabic literary work of all time. The marvelous tales spun by
Shahrazad have captured and excited the imagination of readers and listeners‐‐both Arab and non‐Arab‐‐
for centuries. In class, we will read in Arabic, selections from the Nights, and engage some of the scholarly
debates surrounding this timeless work. We will discuss the question of its origin in folklore and popular
culture and the mystery of its "authorship," as well as the winding tale of its reception, adaptation and
translation. Readings and class discussions will be in both Arabic and English. Prerequisite: Arabic 206 or
equivalent. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23

269

Hebrew Courses (HEBR)
HEBR 101 Elementary Modern Hebrew Think beyond the Bible! Modern Hebrew is a vital language in
several fields from religion and history to international relations and the sciences. This course is for
students with no previous knowledge of Modern Hebrew or whose test scores indicate that this is an
appropriate level of placement. We continually integrate listening, speaking, reading, and writing in
Hebrew, incorporating materials from the Israeli internet and films into level appropriate class activities and
assignments. 6 credits; NE; Fall; Stacy N Beckwith
HEBR 102 Elementary Modern Hebrew This course is for students who have completed Hebrew 101 or
whose test scores indicate that this is an appropriate level of placement. We continue expanding our
vocabulary and grammar knowledge, integrating listening, speaking, reading, and writing in Hebrew. We
also continue working with Israeli films and internet, particularly for a Karaoke in Hebrew group project
which involves learning and performing an Israeli pop song and researching the artists' background and
messages for a class presentation. Prerequisite: Hebrew 101 or equivalent. 6 credits; NE; Winter; Stacy N
Beckwith
HEBR 103 Elementary Modern Hebrew This course is for students who have completed Hebrew 102 or
whose test scores indicate that this is an appropriate level of placement. We continue expanding our
vocabulary and grammar knowledge, integrating listening, speaking, reading, and writing in Hebrew. We
also continue working with Israeli films and internet, particularly to publish in‐class magazines in Hebrew on
topics related to Israel, the Middle East, and Judaic Studies. Prerequisite: Hebrew 102 or equivalent. 6
credits; NE; Spring; Stacy N Beckwith
HEBR 204 Intermediate Modern Hebrew In this course students will strengthen their command of modern
conversational, literary and newspaper Hebrew. As in the elementary sequence, we will continually
integrate listening, speaking, reading, and writing in Hebrew. Popular Israeli music, broadcasts, internet
sources, and films will complement the course's goals. Class projects include a term long research paper on
a topic related to Israel, the Middle East, or Judaic Studies. Students will create a poster in Hebrew to
illustrate their research. They will discuss this with other Hebrew speakers on campus at a class poster
session toward the end of the course. Prerequisite: Hebrew 103 or equivalent. 6 credits; NE; Not offered
2022‐23

Middle Eastern Language Courses (MELA)
MELA 121 East‐West in Israeli and Palestinian Fiction and Film As a crossroads of diverse perspectives in
such a multicultural, but fraught environment in the Middle East, Israeli and Palestinian fiction and film
offer a kaleidoscopic socio‐cultural introduction to Middle East Studies, in microcosm. We will focus on how
mental pictures of home, self, and other have been created, perpetuated, and/or challenged in local fiction
since the 1940s and in film since the 1990s, by authors and artists of Middle Eastern Jewish, European
Jewish, and Palestinian backgrounds. We will also explore community, generational, and gender‐relevant
responses to their projections of post/colonial history and national life in Israel/ Palestine. 6 credits; LA, IS;
Not offered 2022‐23
MELA 121F Middle Eastern Perspectives in Israeli and Palestinian Literature & Film FLAC Hebrew Trailer This
course is a supplement in Hebrew for MELA 121, East‐West in Israeli and Palestinian Fiction and Film. Open
to students currently in Hebrew 103 or higher, we will watch particular film clips from class without
subtitles and discuss them in Hebrew. We will also build vocabulary in Hebrew for talking about some
excerpts of our Israeli fiction from MELA 121, reading and discussing these excerpts in Hebrew as

270
appropriate for the language level(s) of the students in this trailer course. Prerequisite: Hebrew 102;
Concurrent registration in MELA 121. 2 credits; NE; Winter; Stacy N Beckwith
MELA 230 Jewish Collective Memory Judaism emphasizes transmitting memory from one generation to the
next. How have pivotal events and experiences in Jewish history lived on in Jewish collective memory? How
do they continue to speak through artistic/literary composition and museum/memorial design? How does
Jewish collective memory compare with recorded Jewish history? We will study turning points in Jewish
history including the Exodus from Egypt, Jewish expulsion from medieval Spain, the Holocaust, and Israeli
independence, as Jews in different times and places have interpreted them with lasting influence. Research
includes work with print, film, and other visual/ performative media. 6 credits; HI, IS, WR2; Winter; Stacy N
Beckwith

Pertinent Courses






ARBC 185 The Creation of Classical Arabic Literature (not offered in 2022‐23)
CAMS 236 Israeli Society in Israeli Cinema (not offered in 2022‐23)
CAMS 236F Israeli Society in Israeli Cinema ‐ FLAC Hebrew Trailer (not offered in 2022‐23)
CCST 100 Cross Cultural Perspectives on Israeli and Palestinian Identity
MUSC 172 Oud

Music
General Information

The Department of Music at Carleton enrolls several hundred students every term, both majors and
non-majors, in a curriculum that offers a diverse and integrated approach to the areas of
performance, composition, theory, history, and ethnomusicology. Students arrive at Carleton with a
wide range of musical backgrounds and abilities, and all are encouraged to broaden, deepen, enrich
and improve their engagement with music. In addition to applied music-making experiences in our
performing ensembles and private lessons, the Department offers an array of classroom courses that
range from those designed specifically for the introductory level student to advanced seminars for
majors.
Courses in Applied Music

All students, regardless of major, may study an instrument or voice at beginning through advanced
levels, and may participate in the Department's musical ensembles by placement or audition.
Registration for applied music lessons and ensembles must be included in the student's official
registration.
There are several registration options for applied music lessons:



a one‐credit 100‐level course, taken with or without the J (jury) designation
a two‐credit 200‐level course, taken with or without the J (jury) designation

Courses with the J (jury) designation are graded, and include a small end-of-term jury performance
for area faculty; students may elect to S/Cr/NC these courses in accordance with College guidelines.

271

Courses without the J designation are mandatory S/Cr/NC. Permission of the instructor is required
for registration for two credits.
The comprehensive fee does not include the cost of private instruction, and special fees are charged
for applied lessons and some ensemble classes. Fees are not refundable for late drops except when a
late drop is made for medical reasons or in similar emergency situations. In such cases, the student
must consult with the Music Department.
Requirements for the Music Major
The Music Major introduces students to the primary subfields of music, developing the skills of
research, analysis, performance, and the creation of original work. Broadly diverse in its coverage
of styles, cultures, and fields, the Music Department provides students foundational knowledge in
multiple modes of music study, but also offers students substantial freedom in crafting focus of
courses relevant to individual interests. The skills in critical thinking, research, writing, and
performance gained in the major have proven pertinent and applicable to alumni in a broad variety
of fields. Students planning a professional career in music should consult with faculty members in
their area for advice and assistance.
Requirements for the Music Major
Sixty-four credits, including:


Musical Foundations and Theory (16 credits)
o MUSC 103 Musicianship I
o MUSC 104 Musicianship II
o MUSC 110 Theory I: The Principles of Harmony
o MUSC 204 Theory II: Musical Structures



One 200‐ or 300‐level course in Western Art Music (6 credits)
o LCST 250 Songs and Stories: Music and/as Language
o MUSC 211 Race, Gender, and Classical Music
o MUSC 212 Sex, Music, and the Virtuoso (not offered in 2022‐23)
o MUSC 213 J‐Pop: Listening to Music in Modern Japan
o MUSC 217 Opera: Stage, Screen, Recording (not offered in 2022‐23)
o MUSC 218 Listening to Dance Music (not offered in 2022‐23)
o MUSC 219 The Musical Avant‐Garde (not offered in 2022‐23)
o MUSC 241 Music of Latin America (not offered in 2022‐23)
o MUSC 308 Seminar in Music Analysis (not offered in 2022‐23)
o MUSC 313 Video Game Music: History, Interpretation, Practice
One 200‐ or 300‐level course in Ethnomusicology or Popular Music (6 credits)
o ARBC 222 Music in the Middle East
o MUSC 215 Western Music and its Social Ecosystems, 1830‐Present (not offered in 2022‐
23)
o MUSC 232 Golden Age of R & B (not offered in 2022‐23)
o MUSC 246 Music in Racism and Antiracism
o MUSC 247 1950s/60s American Folk Music Revival



272
o
o
o







MUSC 248 Music of South Asia (not offered in 2022‐23)
MUSC 337 Music in Social Movements (not offered in 2022‐23)
MUSC 338 Sonic Spectacles in Minnesota and Beyond: Music as Heritage (not offered in
2022‐23)
o MUSC 341 Rock Lab and Lab (not offered in 2022‐23)
Composition (6 credits)
o MUSC 153J Composition (Juried)
o MUSC 208 Computer Music and Sound
o MUSC 220 Composition Studio
o MUSC 221 Electronic Music Composition
o MUSC 222 Composing for Ad Hoc Ensemble (not offered in 2022‐23)
o MUSC 223 Vocal Counterpoint (not offered in 2022‐23)
o MUSC 224 Collaborative Composition in Community Partnership
o MUSC 225 Performing with Electronics
o MUSC 253J Composition (Juried)
Ensemble Participation (2 credits)
o MUSC 185 Carleton Choir
o MUSC 186 Carleton Chamber Choir
o MUSC 187 Carleton Orchestra
o MUSC 188 Carleton Chinese Music Ensemble
o MUSC 189 Carleton Symphony Band
o MUSC 190 Carleton Jazz Ensemble
o MUSC 194 Chamber Music
o MUSC 195 Jazz Chamber Music
Juried Applied Lessons (4 credits)
o Any combination of juried applied lessons and MUSC 299 may fill this requirement.
Composition 153J/253J does not satisfy this requirement

o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o

MUSC 150J Piano (Juried)
MUSC 151J Voice (Juried)
MUSC 152J Guitar (Juried)
MUSC 155J Violin (Juried)
MUSC 156J Viola (Juried)
MUSC 157J Cello (Juried)
MUSC 158J Classical String Bass (Juried)
MUSC 159J Flute (Juried)
MUSC 160J Oboe/English Horn (Juried)
MUSC 161J Clarinet (Juried)
MUSC 162J Saxophone (Juried)
MUSC 163J Bassoon (Juried)
MUSC 164J French Horn (Juried)
MUSC 165J Trumpet (Juried)
MUSC 166J Trombone/Euphonium (Juried)
MUSC 167J Tuba (Juried)
MUSC 168J Orchestral Percussion (Juried)
MUSC 169J Harp (Juried)
MUSC 170J Harpsichord (Juried)
MUSC 171J Organ (Juried)
MUSC 172J Oud (Juried)
MUSC 174J Recorder (Juried)

273
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o





MUSC 175J Jazz Piano (Juried)
MUSC 176J Electric & Acoustic Bass (Juried)
MUSC 177J Jazz and Blues Guitar (Juried)
MUSC 178J Drum Set Instruction (Juried)
MUSC 179J Jazz Improvisation (Juried)
MUSC 180J Raga: Vocal or Instrumental Study of Hindustani Music (Juried)
MUSC 181J Sitar (Juried)
MUSC 182J Chinese Musical Instruments (Juried)
MUSC 183J World Drumming Instruction (Juried)
MUSC 184J American Folk Instruments (Juried)
MUSC 250J Piano (Juried)
MUSC 251J Voice (Juried)
MUSC 252J Guitar (Juried)
MUSC 255J Violin (Juried)
MUSC 256J Viola (Juried)
MUSC 257J Cello (Juried)
MUSC 258J Classical String Bass (Juried)
MUSC 259J Flute (Juried)
MUSC 260J Oboe/English Horn (Juried)
MUSC 261J Clarinet (Juried)
MUSC 262J Saxophone (Juried)
MUSC 263J Bassoon (Juried)
MUSC 264J French Horn (Juried)
MUSC 265J Trumpet (Juried)
MUSC 266J Trombone/Euphonium (Juried)
MUSC 267J Tuba (Juried)
MUSC 268J Orchestral Percussion (Juried)
MUSC 269J Harp (Juried)
MUSC 270J Harpsichord (Juried)
MUSC 271J Organ (Juried)
MUSC 272J Oud (Juried)
MUSC 274J Recorder (Juried)
MUSC 275J Jazz Piano (Juried)
MUSC 276J Electric & Acoustic Bass (Juried)
MUSC 277J Jazz and Blues Guitar (Juried)
MUSC 278J Drum Set Instruction (Juried)
MUSC 279J Jazz Improvisation (Juried)
MUSC 280J Raga:Voc/Instr Study Hindustani (Juried)
MUSC 281J Sitar (Juried)
MUSC 282J Chinese Musical Instruments (Juried)
MUSC 283J World Drumming Instruction (Juried)
MUSC 284J American Folk Instrument (Juried)
MUSC 299 Recital (not offered in 2022‐23)
300‐level Seminar (6 credits)
o Any Music course numbered between Music 303 to Music 339, Inclusive note: a course
which fulfills the seminar requirement may not be "double counted" toward other
requirements, e.g., Western Art Music, Ethnomusicology, or Popular Music.
Music Electives (12 credits)
o Any MUSC credits, including Music classes and Cognitive Science 130, The Musical Mind,
ensembles, chamber music, applied lessons, and MUSC 299

274


Integrative exercise (6 credits)
o MUSC 400

Music Department Minors
The Music department offers three Music Minors:





American Music Minor provides students with a framework for understanding the diverse music
and musical cultures of America. This minor does not assume a traditional music background and
does not require music theory.
Music Minor is a flexible minor that allows students either a broad range of music study, or enables
a focus on a particular area of musical inquiry.
Music Performance Minor is for students who want to pursue excellence in musical performance
with a focus in a particular instrument, voice, or performance area.

A student may major in Music and minor in Music Performance or American Music. Students will
not be able to major and minor in Music and additionally cannot minor in both Music and Music
Performance.
American Music Minor
The minor in American Music, brings together the most prominent strands of American music
scholarship on campus. Taking its inspiration from the multidisciplinary approaches characteristic
of this emerging field, the minor includes a gateway course surveying American musical history and
genres; a foundational course from a field or interdisciplinary area offering a critical perspective on
American culture; three courses offering in-depth study of musical traditions essential to the
American soundscape and a capstone research seminar in which students pursue individual projects.
No previous musical experience is required.
Requirements for the American Music Minor
Six courses are required.


Gateway Course: 6 credits
o




MUSC 126 America's Music

Foundations: 6 credits
o









AFST 113 Introduction to Africana Studies
AMST 115 Introduction to American Studies
CAMS 110 Introduction to Cinema and Media Studies
GWSS 110 Introduction to Gender, Women's & Sexuality Studies
HIST 122 U.S. Women's History to 1877 (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 123 U.S. Women's History Since 1877 (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 125 African American History I: From Africa to the Civil War
HIST 126 African American History II

275







Soundtracks of America: 18 credits, at least one course must be at the 200‐level or above
o



























MUSC 110 Theory I: The Principles of Harmony
MUSC 204 Theory II: Musical Structures
RELG 140 Religion and American Culture (not offered in 2022‐23)
SOAN 110 Introduction to Anthropology
SOAN 111 Introduction to Sociology

AMST 214 Music in the 1970s (not offered in 2022‐23)
AMST 269 Woodstock Nation (not offered in 2022‐23)
MUSC 115 Listening to the Movies
MUSC 123 The American Film Musical
MUSC 130 The History of Jazz (not offered in 2022‐23)
MUSC 131 The Blues From the Delta to Chicago (not offered in 2022‐23)
MUSC 136 History of Rock
MUSC 137 Rock, Sex, & Rebellion (not offered in 2022‐23)
MUSC 140 Ethnomusicology and the World's Music
MUSC 144 Music and Migration (not offered in 2022‐23)
MUSC 208 Computer Music and Sound
MUSC 211 Race, Gender, and Classical Music
MUSC 212 Sex, Music, and the Virtuoso (not offered in 2022‐23)
MUSC 213 J‐Pop: Listening to Music in Modern Japan
MUSC 215 Western Music and its Social Ecosystems, 1830‐Present (not offered in
2022‐23)
MUSC 217 Opera: Stage, Screen, Recording (not offered in 2022‐23)
MUSC 218 Listening to Dance Music (not offered in 2022‐23)
MUSC 219 The Musical Avant‐Garde (not offered in 2022‐23)
MUSC 232 Golden Age of R & B (not offered in 2022‐23)
MUSC 241 Music of Latin America (not offered in 2022‐23)
MUSC 246 Music in Racism and Antiracism
MUSC 247 1950s/60s American Folk Music Revival
MUSC 248 Music of South Asia (not offered in 2022‐23)
MUSC 341 Rock Lab and Lab (not offered in 2022‐23)

Research Seminar 6 credits
o






MUSC 308 Seminar in Music Analysis (not offered in 2022‐23)
MUSC 313 Video Game Music: History, Interpretation, Practice
MUSC 334 Marvin Gaye (not offered in 2022‐23)
MUSC 337 Music in Social Movements (not offered in 2022‐23)
MUSC 338 Sonic Spectacles in Minnesota and Beyond: Music as Heritage (not
offered in 2022‐23)

Requirements for the Music Minor
The Minor in Music is an excellent way for students to pursue their passion for music from a broad
perspective, but also offers the flexibility for a student to customize a course of study specific to
their particular interests.
36 credits required, including:

276


Musical Foundations and Theory (6 credits)*
o MUSC 110 or MUSC 204



Two 200‐ or 300‐level courses (12 credits) selected from:
o ARBC 222, CAMS 242, MUSC 208, MUSC 210, MUSC 211, MUSC 212, MUSC 213, MUSC
215, MUSC 217, MUSC 220, MUSC 221, MUSC 224, MUSC 227, MUSC 236, MUSC 239,
MUSC 241, MUSC 246, MUSC 247, MUSC 248, or any course number MUSC 303‐339, MUSC
341



300‐level Seminar (6 credits)
o One class from courses numbered MUSC 303‐339



Music Electives (12 credits)
o Any MUSC credits, including Music classes, Cognitive Science 130, The Musical Mind,
ensembles, chamber music, applied lessons, and MUSC 299

Students pursuing work in an interdisciplinary area (e.g. ethnomusicology, media studies, music
psychology) may petition for elective courses outside of Music to count towards the minor.
* As per the college catalog, a score of 4 or 5 on the AP Music Theory exam grants six credits. This
does not grant students automatic exemption from MUSC 103 and/or MUSC 110; exemption in
these courses is determined by the departmental placement exam. Credits earned via the AP exam
do not count for elective credit in the major or minor.

Requirements for the Music Performance Minor
The Minor in Music Performance has a prescribed area of focus for a student who wishes to
pursue excellence in music performance or conducting.
Prerequisite: minimum 1 term of juried lessons at the 200 level; entry into the minor in music
performance is by audition only. Auditions will usually take place during juries held at the end of
each term.
36 credits required, including:





Musical Foundations and Theory (2‐6 credits)*
o One course from MUSC 103, MUSC 104, MUSC 110 or MUSC 204
Juried Applied Lessons (10 credits)
o Any combination of 1‐ or 2‐credit juried lessons; normally these 10 credits of applied study
will be on the same instrument/voice, but in areas such as non‐Western and American folk,
students may petition to count lessons on more than one instrument/voice.
Composition 153J/253J does not satisfy this requirement
Ensemble (3 credits)

o



Three credits from any course number Music 185 to Music 199 (inclusive)
MUSC 342: Music Performance Seminar (3 credits)

277


MUSC 299: Recital (3 credits)
Must be taken once, may be repeated for elective credit



Music Electives (11‐15 credits to total 36 credits)

Any additional MUSC credits, including classroom courses, ensembles, applied lessons or
Cognitive Science 130, The Musical Mind.
It is recommended--though not required--that students minoring in music performance take
additional courses in theory, history, composition, or world musics.
*As per the college catalog, a score of 4 or 5 on the AP Music Theory exam grants six credits. This
does not grant students automatic exemption from MUSC 103 (Musicianship Lab 1) and/or
MUSC 110 (Theory I); exemption in these courses is determined by the departmental placement
exam. Credits earned via the AP exam do not count for elective credit in the major or minor.
Music Courses
MUSC 100 Music and Advertising How can music persuade us to buy that expensive iPhone, drink Coca‐
Cola, or wear those new Nike sneakers? This A&I seminar will focus on music and its role in advertising in
the electronic media. In this class, we will explore how music is produced for advertising spots in radio,
television, and the internet, and how audience reaction determines the success or failure of ads in the
marketplace. As part of the class, we will create our own video ads with music. We will also cover methods
of analysis and criticism of music in advertising by exploring scholarly and critical writing on music in
advertising, all leading up to a final research project. 6 credits; AI, WR1; Fall; Ronald Rodman
MUSC 101 Music Fundamentals A course designed for students with little or no music background as
preparation and support for other music courses, ensemble participation and applied music study. The
course covers the fundamentals of music notation, including notes and chords in treble and bass clefs, key
and time signatures, and the realization of basic rhythmic patterns. 2 credits; ARP; Fall; Alican Camci
MUSC 103 Musicianship I A course in aural skills, focusing upon sight reading using solfège (movable do, la‐
based minor), and short melodic dictation exercises of up to four bars in length in major and minor keys.
Prerequisite: Music 101, or permission of the instructor as assessed by a diagnostic exam administered at
the start of the term. 2 credits; ARP; Winter; Alican Camci
MUSC 104 Musicianship II Continuation of Musicianship I, with an emphasis on singing and dictation skills.
More advanced solfège is introduced, including melodies in minor keys and chromaticism. Longer melodic
dictation exercises which introduce standard four‐and eight‐bar melodic schemas will also be covered.
Some harmonic dictation will also be included. Prerequisite: Music 103, or permission of instructor as
assessed by a diagnostic exam administered at the start of the term. 2 credits; ARP; Spring; Alican Camci
MUSC 108 Introduction to Music Technology A course in using the computer to make meaningful
interventions into our practices as musicians. We'll explore a number of approaches to composing,
producing, and hearing music, among them coding, visual programming, and working in a digital audio
workstation. Students will ultimately combine and hybridize these different methods in order to create
unique, individual systems, using them to make new work. Open to all interested students; no prior
experience with music, programming, or production required. 6 credits; ARP; Fall; Andrea Mazzariello

278
MUSC 109 Choir & A Cappella Arranging Arranging music for vocal groups is a unique balance between
artistic integrity, expressivity, and practicality. This balance will be explored experientially first by
broadening student's compositional skills and then by applying these skills to their own vocal arrangements
for choirs and a cappella groups. Class activities will include studying vocal ranges, scoring for vocal
ensembles, and arranging/transcribing music for various combinations of vocal groups. Prerequisite: Music
103, Music 110 or instructor consent. 3 credits; ARP; Spring; Matthew J Olson
MUSC 110 Theory I: The Principles of Harmony An introduction to the materials of western tonal music,
with an emphasis on harmonic structure and syntax. It covers basic harmonic syntax (through secondary
dominants), melodic phrase structure and cadences, and small musical forms, along with related theoretical
concepts and vocabulary. Student work involves readings, analysis and composition exercises, and short
essay assignments. Prerequisite: Music 101, or permission of the instructor as assessed by a diagnostic
exam administered at the start of the term. 6 credits; LA; Winter; Justin M London
MUSC 111 Music and Storytelling Western music, especially classical music, is often called a “dead” genre.
Part of this has to do with its associations with wealth, its aging audience base, and its seeming loftiness.
But is this music really dead? In this class we will explore the history of Western music, with classical music
as a starting point, but will examine the numerous ways music functions throughout cultures to tell
different kinds of stories. We work from the assumption that no music (or art in general) is apolitical;
because of this it behooves us to examine the ways the music of the past is deployed in service of social and
political values today, whether it is to convince us to buy pizza or to incite revolution. 6 credits; LA, WR2;
Fall; Brooke H McCorkle
MUSC 115 Listening to the Movies We all watch movies, whether it’s in a theater, on television, a
computer, or a smartphone. But we rarely listen to movies. This class is an introduction to film music and
sound. The course begins with a module on how film music generally works within a narrative. With this
foundation, the course then concentrates on the role film music and sound play in shaping our
understanding of the film’ stories. Over the course of the term, students will study a variety of films and
learn about theories of film music and sound. Class assignments include a terminology quiz, cue chart, and
a short comparative essay. The course will culminate in a final project that may take the form of a term
paper or creative project. 6 credits; LA, WR2; Fall; Brooke H McCorkle
MUSC 123 The American Film Musical A survey of film musicals from their beginnings in the 1920s to the
present. The course will cover the definition and attributes of film musicals, how a film musical differs from
a film with music, and then continue with a historical survey of various eras of musicals, such as early sound
film musicals, the film musical at its zenith, the adaptation of Broadway musicals to the screen, and current
postmodern musicals and animated musicals by Disney and Pixar. The course will also discuss how musicals
convey evolving cultural attitudes of gender, race, ethnicity, and sexual orientation, as well as good vs. evil.
6 credits; LA, IDS; Spring; Ronald Rodman
MUSC 124 Hip‐Hop in the 1980s This course will consider the musical elements of early of hip‐hop. Using
guided listening and student responses, we will focus on a single album each week through the term,
traversing the entire deace of the 1980s. 2 credits; HI; Not offered 2022‐23
MUSC 125 Listening to Rock This course will consider the musical elements of Rock. The instructor will
create a theme for the term focusing on a subset of rock history (girl groups, concept albums, etc.). Using
guided listening and student responses, the class will focus on a single album (or other group of tracks) per
week throughout the term. No theme will repeat during any four‐year period, allowing students to take the

279
course multiple times. This course may be offered as a stand‐alone class or as a coordinated trailer to
"History of Rock." 2 credits; S/CR/NC; NE; Fall, Spring; Andy A Flory
MUSC 126 America's Music A survey of American music with particular attention to the interaction of the
folk, popular, and classical realms. No musical experience required. 6 credits; WR2, LA, IDS; Winter; Andy A
Flory
MUSC 128 Conducting Learn the fundamentals of instrumental and choral conducting including gesture,
beat patterns, score reading, and beginning rehearsal techniques. Students in this course will form a
laboratory ensemble that participants lead as a means of gaining conducting experience and experimenting
with the relationship between gesture and sound. Prerequisite: Ability to read music and active
participation in a faculty conducted ensemble, or permission of instructor. 3 credits; ARP; Not offered 2022‐
23
MUSC 130 The History of Jazz A survey of jazz from its beginnings to the present day focusing on the
performer/composers and their music. 6 credits; LA, WR2, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
MUSC 131 The Blues From the Delta to Chicago A history of the Delta blues and its influence on later blues
and popular music styles, tracing its movement from the Mississippi Delta in the 1920s to Chess Records
and the Chicago Blues of the 1940s and 50s (especially Howlin' Wolf and Muddy Waters). Music and
musicians discussed will include the classic blues singers of the 1920s, early country music (Jimmie
Rodgers), and the legacy of Robert Johnson. Issues of authenticity and "ownership" of both the music and
its cultural legacy will also be discussed. The course involves readings, listening assignments, and some
transcriptions of early recorded blues. No prerequisite, although the ability to read music is helpful. 6
credits; LA, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
MUSC 136 History of Rock This course is an introduction to the history of rock music, emphasizing primarily
the period between 1954 and the present. Mixing historical and cultural readings with intense listening, we
will cover the vast repertoire of rock music and many other associated styles. We will focus on the sounds
of the music, learning to distinguish a wide variety of genres, while also tracing the development and
transformation of rock and pop styles. The lectures will use a wide variety of multimedia, including
commercial audio and video, unpublished audio and video sources, print materials, and technological
devices. Knowledge of a technical musical vocabulary and an ability to read music are not required for this
course. 6 credits; LA, WR2, IDS; Spring; Andy A Flory
MUSC 137 Rock, Sex, & Rebellion This course will develop critical listening skills and an understanding of
musical parameters through an introduction to select genres within the history of rock music. Our focus is
on competing aesthetic tendencies and sub‐cultural forces that shaped the music. The course includes
discussions of rock’s significance in American culture and the minority communities that have enriched
rock’s legacy as an expressively diverse form. Examined genres include blues, jazz, early rock ’n’ roll, folk
rock, protest music, psychedelia, music of the British Invasion, punk, art rock, Motown, funk, hip hop, heavy
metal, grunge, glitter, and disco. Lectures, readings, careful listening, and video screenings. Students will
also argue for the best rock song of all time. 6 credits; LA, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
MUSC 140 Ethnomusicology and the World's Music This course introduces the world's musical diversity and
the discipline of ethnomusicology through scholarship and music‐making. We will study the history, theory,
and methods of ethnomusicology, as well as contemporary critiques. Students will receive group instruction
(instruments provided) and learn through playing rudimentary musical material from one or more
traditions. No musical experience necessary. 6 credits; ARP, IS, WR2; Spring; Melinda Russell

280
MUSC 144 Music and Migration Throughout history, people have relocated for a variety of reasons, both
voluntarily and forcibly. What sorts of consequences do mass movements of people have on cultural
practices? This course will examine the legacy of the slave trade with relation to African‐influenced music
developments throughout the Americas and the Caribbean. We will first consider the nuances of West
African music practices and beliefs before and during the slave trade. Then, we will explore a variety of
sacred and secular traditions that developed in the New World as a result of the African Diaspora, including
spirituals, the blues, jazz, rock and roll, and hip hop in North America; tango, blocos afro, cumbia, and
candombe in South America; and Santería, reggae, timba, rara, and steel pan in the Caribbean. As part of
this exploration, we will consider difficult questions, such as what is “black music”?; What ethical
considerations must we think about in relation to who can/should play black music?; and What sorts of
similarities and differences exist between African‐influenced music styles in the Americas, and why? Lastly,
we will consider how music in Africa has changed in more recent times due to a return of African‐Americans
back to their ancestral roots as well as other points of contact between the Americas and Africa, especially
in relation to genres like Afrobeat, highlife, and gumbe. No previous musical experience required. 6 credits;
LA, WR2, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
MUSC 150 Piano Weekly half‐hour lessons, with repertoire selected as appropriate for the individual
student's experience. Works from a variety of style periods may be studied, with attention to both musical
and technical development. Open to students with no previous musical experience. 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP;
Fall, Winter, Spring; Nikki Melville, Loren B Fishman, Matthew McCright, Marcia Widman
MUSC 150J Piano (Juried) Weekly half‐hour lessons, with repertoire selected as appropriate for the
individual student's experience. Works from a variety of style periods may be studied, with attention to
both musical and technical development. The juried (J) course includes the opportunity for students to
share their work in an end‐of‐term public or closed performance. Open to students with no previous
musical experience. 1 credit; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Nikki Melville, Loren B Fishman, Matthew McCright,
Marcia Widman
MUSC 151 Voice A study of voice production, breathing, tone development, diction, and pronunciation.
Selection (according to the individual voice) of Italian, German, French, and English songs of the Classic,
Romantic, and Modern periods. Arias and songs from operas, oratorios, musical theater and popular songs
from Western and non‐Western traditions. In addition, one studio class per week. 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP;
Fall, Winter, Spring; Rick A Penning, KrisAnne E Weiss, Matthew J Olson
MUSC 151J Voice (Juried) A study of voice production, breathing, tone development, diction, and
pronunciation. Selection (according to the individual voice) of Italian, German, French, and English songs of
the Classic, Romantic, and Modern periods. Arias and songs from operas, oratorios, musical theater and
popular songs from Western and non‐Western traditions. In addition, one studio class per week. 1 credit;
ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Rick A Penning, KrisAnne E Weiss, Matthew J Olson
MUSC 152 Guitar Studies for the development of technique appropriate to the needs of the student. Music
is chosen from all musical periods including folk picking, blues, ragtime, popular and classical styles.
Students with no prior experience or lessons should take one term of class guitar (Music 197). 1 credit;
S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Mark Kreitzer
MUSC 152J Guitar (Juried) Studies for the development of technique appropriate to the needs of the
student. Music is chosen from all musical periods including folk picking, blues, ragtime, popular and classical
styles. Students with no prior experience or lessons should take one term of class guitar (Music 197). 1
credit; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Mark Kreitzer

281
MUSC 153J Composition (Juried) Individual instruction focusing on the student’s original compositions.
Course work includes the study of compositional techniques, analysis of relevant works, and
computer/MIDI/synthesizer technologies. The course is particularly directed toward the major who wishes
to pursue the composition option in the Senior Integrative Exercise. Prerequisite: Music 220, or two courses
from Music 221, 222 or 223 or instructor consent. 1 credit; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Alican Camci, Andrea
Mazzariello
MUSC 155 Violin 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Hector L Valdivia, Natalia Moiseeva, Susan M
Crawford
MUSC 155J Violin (Juried) 1 credit; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Hector L Valdivia, Natalia Moiseeva, Susan M
Crawford
MUSC 156 Viola 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Hector L Valdivia, Natalia Moiseeva, Susan M
Crawford
MUSC 156J Viola (Juried) 1 credit; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Hector L Valdivia, Natalia Moiseeva, Susan M
Crawford
MUSC 157 Cello 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Thomas Rosenberg, Greg C Byers
MUSC 157J Cello (Juried) 1 credit; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Thomas Rosenberg, Greg C Byers
MUSC 158 Classical String Bass The study of the acoustic string bass in the Classical style. 1 credit; S/CR/NC;
ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Connie K Martin
MUSC 158J Classical String Bass (Juried) The study of the acoustic string bass in the Classical style. 1 credit;
ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Connie K Martin
MUSC 159 Flute 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Martha N Jamsa
MUSC 159J Flute (Juried) 1 credit; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Martha N Jamsa
MUSC 160 Oboe/English Horn 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Merilee I Klemp
MUSC 160J Oboe/English Horn (Juried) 1 credit; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Merilee I Klemp
MUSC 161 Clarinet 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Nina E Olsen
MUSC 161J Clarinet (Juried) 1 credit; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Nina E Olsen
MUSC 162 Saxophone 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Greg Keel
MUSC 162J Saxophone (Juried) 1 credit; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Greg Keel
MUSC 163 Bassoon 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring
MUSC 163J Bassoon (Juried) 1 credit; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring
MUSC 164 French Horn 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Gwen M Anderson
MUSC 164J French Horn (Juried) 1 credit; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Gwen M Anderson
MUSC 165 Trumpet 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Lynn B Deichert
MUSC 165J Trumpet (Juried) 1 credit; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Lynn B Deichert

282
MUSC 166 Trombone/Euphonium 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Carson A King‐Fournier
MUSC 166J Trombone/Euphonium (Juried) 1 credit; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Carson A King‐Fournier
MUSC 167 Tuba 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Carson A King‐Fournier
MUSC 167J Tuba (Juried) 1 credit; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Carson A King‐Fournier
MUSC 168 Orchestral Percussion Instruction on orchestral percussion instruments such as snare drum,
mallets, and tympani. Equipment available for registered students. 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter,
Spring
MUSC 168J Orchestral Percussion (Juried) Instruction on orchestral percussion instruments such as snare
drum, mallets, and tympani. Equipment available for registered students. 1 credit; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring
MUSC 169 Harp Studies to develop technique and a varied selection of works from the Renaissance and
Baroque periods. Works from the Romantic and Modern periods are also studied. 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP;
Fall, Winter, Spring; Elinor Niemisto
MUSC 169J Harp (Juried) Studies to develop technique and a varied selection of works from the
Renaissance and Baroque periods. Works from the Romantic and Modern periods are also studied. 1 credit;
ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Elinor Niemisto
MUSC 170 Harpsichord 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Janean A Hall
MUSC 170J Harpsichord (Juried) 1 credit; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Janean A Hall
MUSC 171 Organ Basic piano skills required. 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Janean A Hall
MUSC 171J Organ (Juried) Basic piano skills required. 1 credit; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Janean A Hall
MUSC 172 Oud Beginning through advanced study of the Arab oud. Previous musical experience is not
necessary. Instruments are provided. 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Yaron Klein
MUSC 172J Oud (Juried) Beginning through advanced study of the Arab oud. Previous musical experience is
not necessary. Instruments are provided. 1 credit; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Yaron Klein
MUSC 174 Recorder 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring
MUSC 174J Recorder (Juried) 1 credit; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring
MUSC 175 Jazz Piano Study the tools for learning the jazz "language." Learn to improvise through scale and
mode study, transcription, and composition. Turn chord symbols into chord voicings and accompaniment.
Explore the blues, jazz "standards," and today's music. Materials: staff paper, The Real Book, vol. 1, or
similar fake book, and the app iReal Pro. Weekly studio class required. Prerequisite: Three years of piano or
instructor permission. 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Laura S Caviani
MUSC 175J Jazz Piano (Juried) Study the tools for learning the jazz "language." Learn to improvise through
scale and mode study, transcription, and composition. Turn chord symbols into chord voicings and
accompaniment. Explore the blues, jazz "standards," and today's music. Materials: staff paper, The Real
Book, vol. 1, or similar fake book, and the app iReal Pro. Weekly studio class required. Prerequisite: Three
years of piano or instructor permission. 1 credit; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Laura S Caviani

283
MUSC 176 Electric & Acoustic Bass The study of either electric bass guitar or acoustic string bass in all
contemporary styles including rock, jazz, pop, rap, and reggae. 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring;
Travis J Schilling
MUSC 176J Electric & Acoustic Bass (Juried) The study of either electric bass guitar or acoustic string bass in
all contemporary styles including rock, jazz, pop, rap, and reggae. 1 credit; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Travis J
Schilling
MUSC 177 Jazz and Blues Guitar Study of chord voicings, accompanimental techniques, and solo guitar
performance in the jazz idiom. Prerequisites: previous study of guitar and the ability to read music, or the
permission of the instructor. Students must provide their own instruments. 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall,
Winter, Spring; Zacc Harris
MUSC 177J Jazz and Blues Guitar (Juried) Study of chord voicings, accompanimental techniques, and solo
guitar performance in the jazz idiom. Prerequisites: previous study of guitar and the ability to read music, or
the permission of the instructor. Students must provide their own instruments. 1 credit; ARP; Fall, Winter,
Spring; Zacc Harris
MUSC 178 Drum Set Instruction Drum Set Instruction on/in jazz and popular drumming styles which use the
standard drum set. Equipment available for registered students. 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter,
Spring; Dave Schmalenberger
MUSC 178J Drum Set Instruction (Juried) Drum Set Instruction on/in jazz and popular drumming styles
which use the standard drum set. Equipment available for registered students. 1 credit; ARP; Fall, Winter,
Spring; Dave Schmalenberger
MUSC 179 Jazz Improvisation The study of the basic grammar and syntax of jazz improvisation styles,
including transcribing solos, chord/scale materials and melodic patterns. Weekly studio class required. 1
credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Laura S Caviani
MUSC 179J Jazz Improvisation (Juried) The study of the basic grammar and syntax of jazz improvisation
styles, including transcribing solos, chord/scale materials and melodic patterns. Weekly studio class
required. 1 credit; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Laura S Caviani
MUSC 180 Raga: Vocal or Instrumental Study of Hindustani Music Beginning, intermediate, and advanced
students of voice, guitar, violin, flute, clarinet, etc., approach raga from their current level of musicianship.
In all cases, traditional practical instruction is complemented by some theoretical and philosophical
exploration of the underpinnings of the music. 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; David S
Whetstone
MUSC 180J Raga: Vocal or Instrumental Study of Hindustani Music (Juried) Beginning, intermediate, and
advanced students of voice, guitar, violin, flute, clarinet, etc., approach raga from their current level of
musicianship. In all cases, traditional practical instruction is complemented by some theoretical and
philosophical exploration of the underpinnings of the music. 1 credit; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; David S
Whetstone
MUSC 181 Sitar Beginning through advanced study of sitar in the gayaki ang style of Ustad Vilayat Khan.
Previous musical experience is not necessary. Sitars are provided. 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter,
Spring; David S Whetstone

284
MUSC 181J Sitar (Juried) Beginning through advanced study of sitar in the gayaki ang style of Ustad Vilayat
Khan. Previous musical experience is not necessary. Sitars are provided. 1 credit; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring;
David S Whetstone
MUSC 182 Chinese Musical Instruments Beginning through advanced study on traditional Chinese
instruments, pipa (Chinese lute), erhu (Chinese violin), guzheng (Chinese zither), zhongruan (Chinese moon
guitar), hulusi, bawu and dizi (Chinese bamboo flutes). 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Gao
Hong
MUSC 182J Chinese Musical Instruments (Juried) Beginning through advanced study on traditional Chinese
instruments, pipa (Chinese lute), erhu (Chinese violin), guzheng (Chinese zither), zhongruan (Chinese moon
guitar), hulusi, bawu and dizi (Chinese bamboo flutes). 1 credit; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Gao Hong
MUSC 183 World Drumming Instruction World drumming instruction in various ethnic drumming styles
including West African (Ghanaian instruments), Cuban (congas), North Indian (tabla) and Middle Eastern
(dumbek). Equipment available for registered students. 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring
MUSC 183J World Drumming Instruction (Juried) World drumming instruction in various ethnic drumming
styles including West African (Ghanaian instruments), Cuban (congas), North Indian (tabla) and Middle
Eastern (dumbek). Equipment available for registered students. 1 credit; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring
MUSC 184 American Folk Instruments Beginning to advanced study of technique and improvisational styles
on American folk instruments. Students may study 5‐string banjo (bluegrass or clawhammer style),
bluegrass guitar, Dobro©, fiddle (violin, viola, cello), bass, ukulele, mandolin, and accordion. The Music
Department has a single mandolin, fiddle, banjo, and guitar (and two ukuleles) available for shared use by
enrolled students unable to provide their own instruments. 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring;
Mark Kreitzer
MUSC 184J American Folk Instruments (Juried) Beginning to advanced study of technique and
improvisational styles on American folk instruments. Students may study 5‐string banjo (bluegrass or
clawhammer style), bluegrass guitar, Dobro©, fiddle (violin, viola, cello), bass, ukulele, mandolin, and
accordion. The Music Department has a single mandolin, fiddle, banjo, and guitar (and two ukuleles)
available for shared use by enrolled students unable to provide their own instruments 1 credit; ARP; Fall,
Winter, Spring; Mark Kreitzer
MUSC 185 Carleton Choir The Carleton Choir, the cornerstone of the choral program, is a select mixed
chorus of Carleton students. Each term, the ensemble presents a concert of short and extended works from
the large bodies of classical, ethnic, and cultural repertories, including works for mixed, treble, and tenor‐
bass voices. Concerts are sometimes repeated off campus. Students must have good vocal skills, music
reading ability, and a high degree of interest in performing quality choral music. Admission is by audition.
Prerequisite: Audition. 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Matthew J Olson
MUSC 186 Carleton Chamber Choir The Carleton Chamber Choir is a select, mixed ensemble performing
challenging choral music from the Renaissance era to the twenty first century. Admission is by audition and
membership in the Carleton Choir (MUSC 185) is also required. Except in rare instances,
Chamber Choir singers are expected to commit to all three terms in a given academic year. One weekly TBD
sectional rehearsal in addition to the Thursday 5‐6:30PM meeting time. Prerequisite: Requires concurrent
registration in Music 185. 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Matthew J Olson

285
MUSC 187 Carleton Orchestra The Carleton Orchestra performs large symphonic masterpieces, such as
Beethoven, Stravinsky and Bernstein. Concerti with students and faculty soloists, and smaller works for
string and wind ensembles are also performed. Occasional sight‐reading sessions. Admission by audition. 1
credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Hector L Valdivia
MUSC 188 Carleton Chinese Music Ensemble The ensemble will use indigenous instruments and a Chinese
approach to musical training in order to learn and perform music from China. In addition to
the Wednesday meeting time, there will be one sectional rehearsal each week. Prerequisite: Previous
experience in a music ensemble, Chinese Musical instruments or instructor permission. 1 credit; S/CR/NC;
ARP, IS; Fall, Winter, Spring; Gao Hong
MUSC 189 Carleton Symphony Band The Carleton Symphony Band performs music selected from the
standard and contemporary repertory, including compositions by Holst, Masianka, Arnold and others.
Regular sight‐reading sessions. Admission by audition. 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Claire K
Larson
MUSC 190 Carleton Jazz Ensemble The Carleton Jazz Ensemble's focus is on improvisation and the fusion
between jazz, rock, funk, and Latin influences. There is no predetermined instrumentation. Rather, the
ensemble's size and instrumentation vary each term. String players, vocalists, and any brass or woodwind
instrumentalists are welcome to register. The ensemble performs once each term. Prerequisite: Admission
by audition. 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Laura S Caviani
MUSC 192 West African Drum Ensemble The ensemble will use indigenous instruments and an African
approach to musical training in order to learn and perform rhythms and songs from West Africa.
Prerequisite: Music 199 and/or instructor permission. 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP, IS; Fall, Winter, Spring
MUSC 194 Chamber Music Small group study and performance of instrumental and/or vocal chamber
music from the western art music or non‐western/folk repertory. Groups are usually formed by students
prior to registration, and should consist of 3‐8 musicians. Student groups are coached weekly by specialized
music faculty, and participate in an end‐of‐term performance. Students must be registered, may not audit,
and can register for only one group per term. Prerequisite: At least one term of applied music lessons at
Carleton, or co‐registration in applied music lessons, or permission of instructor. 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP;
Fall, Winter, Spring; Nikki Melville, Hector L Valdivia, Natalia Moiseeva, Nina E Olsen, Greg C Byers, Gao
Hong, Loren B Fishman, Martha N Jamsa, Matthew McCright
MUSC 195 Jazz Chamber Music Small groups participate in the study and performance of instrumental
and/or vocal jazz chamber music. Groups are usually formed by students prior to registration, and should
usually consist of 3‐8 students. Groups rehearse independently, and are coached weekly by jazz music
faculty; all groups participate in an end‐of‐term performance. Students must register, and may not audit;
students register for only one group, but may participate in two groups with permission of instructor.
Prerequisite: At least one term of applied music lessons at Carleton, or co‐registration in applied music
lessons, or permission of instructor. 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Laura S Caviani, Zacc Harris
MUSC 196 Jazz Workshop This class focuses on the theory and practice of jazz improvisation. Students will
develop their improvisational skills by learning and applying various scales, modes, and chord structures to
lab performances of standard jazz repertoire on their respective instruments. Prerequisite: Ability to read
music and facility on an instrument/voice: performing knowledge of major scales: or instructor permission.
1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Laura S Caviani

286
MUSC 197 Class Guitar An introduction to classical and folk guitar: styles, chords and music notation for
persons with little or no previous music instruction. Not to be taken concurrently with Music 152 or 252
(Guitar). 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Mark Kreitzer
MUSC 198 Class Voice This course provides students with a communal experience to learn the art of
singing. Designed for beginners, the class offers group exercises and vocalizing, solo lessons, listening
assignments, lectures, and readings to learn the skills to sing musical styles ranging from classical to musical
theater to global folk songs. Some experience with Western musical notation is helpful, though not
required. 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall; Matthew J Olson
MUSC 199 Fundamentals of African Drumming Class instruction in basic techniques of African drumming.
No musical training or experience is necessary. 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Spring
MUSC 204 Theory II: Musical Structures An investigation into the nature of musical sounds and the way
they are combined to form rhythms, melodies, harmonies, and form. Topics include the nature of musical
pitch, the structure of musical scales and their influence on melody, what gives rise to a sense of tonality,
the complexity of rhythmic patterns, and the architecture of musical form. Student work includes building a
musical instrument, programming a drum machine, writing computer code to create harmonies and
timbres, and an extended music analysis project using empirical methods. Prerequisite: Music 101, or
permission of the instructor as assessed by a diagnostic exam administered at the start of the term. 6
credits; LA, WR2, QRE; Spring; Justin M London
MUSC 208 Computer Music and Sound This course surveys computer techniques for analyzing, synthesizing,
manipulating, and creating musical sounds. We'll study the basic components of digital sound: waveforms,
oscillators, envelopes, delay lines, and filters. While we’ll explore the techniques and concepts of computer
music in detail, our focus will be putting them to work in our creative practice, using open source computer
music languages as well as digital audio workstations, according to the strengths and limitations of each
music‐making environment. We’ll show how computer music composition takes shape in a wide variety of
styles and aesthetics, free to choose among them or create our own. Prerequisite: Music 108 or Computer
Science 111 or Instructor permission. 6 credits; ARP; Spring; Alican Camci
MUSC 209 Interactive Music Systems Technological tools assist and mediate a great diversity of musical
compositions and performances. This course focuses specifically on the dynamic uses of technology, and
systems that require significant interaction between composer/performer and software/hardware. The
course will focus especially on dataflow programming in the Max environment, creating custom software
for use in performing original work, informed by our investigation into relevant model compositions as well
as the principles of digital audio. Prerequisite: A willingness to perform original music on an instrument or
voice and Music 108 or Computer Science 111, or instructor consent. 6 credits; Not offered 2022‐23
MUSC 211 Race, Gender, and Classical Music This course examines the history of Western classical music
through the lens of race and gender. The social, political, economic and cultural ecosystems in which
Western classical music evolved provide frameworks for understanding the complex relationships between
composers, performers, and audiences both past and present. Through a variety of assignments including
forum posts, quizzes, and a final project, students will develop critical thinking, research, and
communication skills to help them better understand the role of Western classical music in the world today.
6 credits; LA, WR2; Winter; Brooke H McCorkle
MUSC 212 Sex, Music, and the Virtuoso From Paganini to Esperanza, Liszt to Lang Lang, Wieck to Hahn,
audiences have long adored and obsessed over musical virtuosity. But what do we mean when we call
someone a musical virtuoso? How is virtuosity enmeshed with ideas of genius, race, and gender? How have

287
both historical and contemporary discourses conflated musical and sexual prowess? This class explores the
above questions, concentrating on music and figures operating within the world of Western art music along
with references to jazz and popular music. An ability to read music is required. Prerequisite: Music 110 or
204 highly desirable. 6 credits; LA, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
MUSC 213 J‐Pop: Listening to Music in Modern Japan Japanese popular music encompasses a wide variety
of genres, from World War II propaganda tunes to anime soundtracks. But how does this music relate to
the history of modern Japan? What is “modern” (or post‐modern) about this specific music? This class will
examine the creation and consumption of Japanese popular music from around 1945 to present, focusing
on how popular music worked in the cultural and political milieu. Through the study of Japanese folk, jazz,
rock, hip‐hop, bubble gum pop, and film music, students will engage with broader historical trajectories in
society. We will discuss music as it relates to issues of race, gender, and pop culture in Japan and around
the world. 6 credits; NE, WR2, IS; Winter; Brooke H McCorkle
MUSC 215 Western Music and its Social Ecosystems, 1830‐Present This class expands students’
understanding of Western music by concentrating on the social ecosystem of performers, musicians, and
consumer‐listeners of both past and present. Students will explore broad themes in music history, such as
concepts of sound, materiality, religion, politics, embodiment, and narrative. Through a variety of
assignments including listening analyses, creative responses, and a final project, students will develop
critical thinking, research, and communication skills to help them be successful in their various musical
endeavors. Prerequisite: Ability to read Western Music Notation recommended. 6 credits; LA, WR2; Not
offered 2022‐23
MUSC 217 Opera: Stage, Screen, Recording Pure pleasure or pure torture? Opera is said to be both. This
course is an introduction to opera based on its 400‐year history from 1600 to the present. Over the term,
we will explore several topics including how music conveys characters’ feelings, singers and the allure of the
voice, race, gender, and opera, opera in film, and the experience of live performance. We will deal with a
wide variety of pieces and investigate the social and cultural functions of opera via creative research
assignments. No previous musical experience necessary. Prerequisite: None, ability to read music is not
necessary. 6 credits; LA, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
MUSC 218 Listening to Dance Music This course explores the relationship between western art music and
social dance, staged productions, or stylized concert genres based on social dance and staged productions.
Students will examine how bodies have moved to music by asking the questions: which music? and which
bodies? Repertoire will range from sixteenth‐century French court ballets, to the un‐danceable waltzes of
Chopin and Brahms, to Hamilton, where hip hop meets colonial American country dance. 6 credits; LA,
WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
MUSC 219 The Musical Avant‐Garde “Piano Piece for David Tudor #3: most of them were very old
grasshoppers.” –La Monte Young (1960). What is an avant‐garde? How can music be “ahead of its time”? In
this class, students will explore the histories, aesthetics, and socio‐cultural contexts of musical avant‐gardes
and musical experimentalism post‐WWII. While the course focuses on art music of the 1950s‐1970s (from
concert pieces by Stockhausen and Cage, to the “intermedial” art forms promoted by Fluxus, to the avant‐
jazz of Ornette Coleman and John Coltrane), students will also consider what a musical avant‐garde in 2020
might sound like, look like, or act like. 6 credits; LA, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
MUSC 220 Composition Studio This course focuses on creating new music, through several exercises as well
as a substantial term composition. Class meetings reinforce key concepts, aesthetic trends, and
compositional techniques, as well as provide opportunities for group feedback on works in progress.

288
Individual instruction focuses on students' own creative work in depth and detail. Prerequisite: Music 110,
204 or instructor permission. 6 credits; ARP; Winter; Andrea Mazzariello
MUSC 221 Electronic Music Composition This course focuses on creating new electronic music. We will use
digital audio workstations for composition and production, grounding their use in the fundamentals of
digital audio. We will listen extensively, in many genres of electronic music, applying this critical listening to
our own work and our colleagues' work. Frequent composition assignments build fundamental skills in
melodic creation and development, drum programming, synthesis, and audio production. The course
culminates in a term project, a stylistically unrestricted, substantial original composition. Prerequisite:
Music 108, Music 110 or instructor consent. 6 credits; ARP; Winter; Andrea Mazzariello
MUSC 222 Composing for Ad Hoc Ensemble In this composition course, we will create music for ourselves
to perform. The members of the class constitute the Ad Hoc Ensemble; we will begin by writing small
studies for individual instruments or voices in this group, and methodically build to composing for the
entire ensemble. We will focus on idiomatic instrumental writing and orchestration, and will explore both
traditional and experimental approaches to notation. Prerequisite: Music 110 or instructor permission. 3
credits; ARP; Not offered 2022‐23
MUSC 223 Vocal Counterpoint In this composition course, we will write for (our own) singing voices,
anchoring our writing to various traditions of vocal part writing while developing our own idiosyncratic
approaches. We will move methodically from singing single lines against drones, to creating two‐, three‐,
and four‐part compositions, culminating in a substantial composition for multiple voices per part. We will
sing constantly to reinforce key concepts and to hear our works in progress, and will base our analysis
of our own compositions as well as more canonical works on bringing the music to life through vocal
performance. Prerequisite: Ability and willingness to sing from score, and Music 110 or instructor
permission. 3 credits; ARP; Not offered 2022‐23
MUSC 224 Collaborative Composition in Community Partnership In this composition course, students will
co‐create music with youth at The Key, a youth‐led, youth services organization in downtown Northfield.
Members of the class will visit regularly to make and share music, and will work towards a substantial
collaborative composition, while also creating smaller projects throughout the term. To support this work,
we will study model compositions that leave key parameters open, such as instrumentation and ensemble
size, or that use alternate notation systems, or that depend on structured improvisation. We will also
explore various technological tools that can extend our collaborative capabilities and that can assist us in
documenting and presenting our collaborative work. Prerequisite: Music 108 or Music 110 or instructor
consent. 6 credits; ARP; Spring; Andrea Mazzariello
MUSC 225 Performing with Electronics Performing with Electronics is both a survey and a creative course.
We will explore historical and contemporary examples of performing with live electronics that incorporate
both analog and digital technologies, such as use of turntables and sampling, microphones and speakers,
synthesizers, no‐input mixing, digital processing, among others. Taking cue from these different approaches
to working with electronics in real time, we will investigate ways of approaching a live scenario, designing
hardware and software interfaces for performance. Our goal will be learning to perform with our setups,
ultimately looking into the possibilities of performing as an ensemble. 3 credits; ARP; Fall; Alican Camci
MUSC 227 Perception and Cognition of Music Covers basic issues in auditory perception and cognition with
an emphasis on the perception of musical pitch, including sensory discrimination, categorical perception,
roughness and dissonance, absolute pitch, and auditory streaming. Other topics to be covered include the
processing of language and music, and emotional responses to music. A grade of C‐ or better must be

289
earned in both Music 227 and 228 to satisfy the LS requirement. Prerequisite: A previous course in Music or
Psychology, or instructor permission; Concurrent registration in Music 228. 6 credits; QRE, LS; Fall; Justin M
London
MUSC 228 Perception and Cognition of Music Lab An introduction to the methods of experimental and
observational research in music perception and cognition. Student teams will replicate/extend classic
experiments in music perception, which will involve reviewing historical and current literature, creating
stimuli, running experimental trials, performing statistical analyses of data, and giving a poster presentation
of their results. A grade of C‐ or better must be earned in both Music 227 and 228 to satisfy the LS
requirement. Prerequisite: Concurrent registration in Music 227. 2 credits; LS, QRE; Fall; Justin M London
MUSC 232 Golden Age of R & B A survey of rhythm and blues from 1945 to 1975, focusing on performers,
composers and the music industry. 6 credits; LA, WR2, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
MUSC 239 The Philosophy of Music What is Music, and what exactly is a “musical composition,” especially
in the age of recorded music and sampling? Can music tell a story, express an emotion, or convey a
proposition? And if music can do any of these things, how does it do it? Last but not least, how are we to
judge the value of musical pieces and musical practices? Do we need to judge popular music differently
from so‐called “art” music? To address these questions we will listen to a wide range of musical examples,
from Bach and Mozart to the Beatles and Jimi Hendrix, and we will read a wide range of writings about
music, from Plato, Rousseau, and Kant to current philosophers, including Scruton, Kivy, Davies, Carroll, and
Gracyk. Prerequisite: Previous music or philosophy course or instructor permission. 6 credits; LA, WR2;
Winter; Justin M London
MUSC 240 Music in Health, Disability, and Disease We’ll investigate music's relationships to health,
disability, and disease using scholarly articles, documentaries, historical archives, and current events. How
does musical activity promote or enhance health in everyday life? How do various disabilities shape musical
experience? How can music intervene in disease processes? Our inquiry will include the many musical
responses to and adaptations necessitated by COVID‐19. We will consider the place of sound and music as
interventions in systemic racism, increasingly recognized as a public health threat. Students will complete a
research paper and presentation on a topic of their choosing, guided throughout the term. 6 credits; SI,
WR2, IDS; Winter; Melinda Russell
MUSC 241 Music of Latin America This course is designed to increase your awareness of musical styles in
Latin America within particular social, economic, and political contexts. We will cover topics related to
popular, folkloric, classical, and indigenous musics spanning from Mexico to South America's Southern
Cone. The course will include elements of performance and dance instruction in addition to a critical
examination of lived experiences across the region. No previous musical experience is necessary. 6 credits;
LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
MUSC 246 Music in Racism and Antiracism Music has a long, ugly history as a tool for the transmission of
racism, and a vital one as a weapon against it. We will survey important instantiations at the intersections
of music and racism in blackface minstrelsy, western classical music, Dalit music, the U.S. national anthem,
white nationalism, and the anti‐apartheid movement, among others. Centering racism and antiracism, we
will investigate the careers and music of Paul Robeson, Hazel Scott, Charity Bailey, and Janelle Monae,
among others. Students will complete an original guided research project on a topic of their choice. No
musical experience required. 6 credits; SI, WR2, IDS; Spring; Melinda Russell
MUSC 247 1950s/60s American Folk Music Revival Through scholarship and music‐making, we’ll explore the
historical bases of musical style, the role of recorded music, the social construction of a “folk music” milieu,

290
and the music of Pete Seeger, Woody Guthrie, Phil Ochs, Bob Dylan, Joan Baez, Odetta, et al. No musical
experience necessary; you need not read musical notation. Section 1 (beginning folk guitar–instruments
provided) only for those with no guitar experience; Section 2 (folk workshop –provide your own
instruments) if you have any experience on guitar, banjo, fiddle, mandolin, ukelele, Dobro, viola, cello, or
bass. 6 credits; ARP; Spring; Melinda Russell
MUSC 248 Music of South Asia This course focuses on South Asian musical traditions including qawwali, folk
and popular musics, and the classical Hindustani and Carnatic traditions of North and South India. We will
consider the historical and cultural contexts of several genres, read the work of scholars from various
disciplines, and study relevant audio and video. Students will learn rudimentary theory of Indian classical
music, understand its twentieth and twenty‐first century developments, and develop listening skills to
enable recognition of major genres, styles, and artists. One day a week will be devoted to applied study of
Indian vocal raga. No musical background required. 6 credits; ARP, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
MUSC 250 Piano Weekly one‐hour lessons, with repertoire selected as appropriate for the individual
student's experience. Works from a variety of style periods may be studied, with attention to both musical
and technical development. Music 250 is intended for the more advanced piano student; permission of
instructor is required. 2 credits; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Nikki Melville, Loren B Fishman,
Matthew McCright, Marcia Widman
MUSC 250J Piano (Juried) Weekly one‐hour lessons, with repertoire selected as appropriate for the
individual student's experience. Works from a variety of style periods may be studied, with attention
to both musical and technical development. The juried (J) course includes the opportunity for students to
share their work in an end‐of‐term public or closed performance. Music 250J is intended for the more
advanced piano student; permission of instructor is required. 2 credits; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Nikki
Melville, Loren B Fishman, Matthew McCright, Marcia Widman
MUSC 251 Voice A study of voice production, breathing, tone development, diction, and pronunciation.
Selection (according to the individual voice) of Italian, German, French, and English songs of the Classic,
Romantic, and Modern periods. Arias and songs from operas, oratorios, musical theater and popular songs
from Western and non‐Western traditions. In addition, one studio class per week. Prerequisite: Music 151
or permission of the instructor. 2 credits; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Rick A Penning, KrisAnne E
Weiss, Matthew J Olson
MUSC 251J Voice (Juried) A study of voice production, breathing, tone development, diction, and
pronunciation. Selection (according to the individual voice) of Italian, German, French, and English songs of
the Classic, Romantic, and Modern periods. Arias and songs from operas, oratorios, musical theater and
popular songs from Western and non‐Western traditions. In addition, one studio class per week.
Prerequisite: Music 151 or permission of the instructor. 2 credits; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Rick A Penning,
KrisAnne E Weiss, Matthew J Olson
MUSC 252 Guitar Studies for the development of technique appropriate to the needs of the student. Music
is chosen from all musical periods including folk picking, blues, ragtime, popular and classical styles.
Students with no prior experience or lessons should take one term of class guitar (Music 197). Prerequisite:
Instructor Permission. 2 credits; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Mark Kreitzer
MUSC 252J Guitar (Juried) Studies for the development of technique appropriate to the needs of the
student. Music is chosen from all musical periods including folk picking, blues, ragtime, popular and classical
styles. Students with no prior experience or lessons should take one term of class guitar (Music 197).
Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2 credits; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Mark Kreitzer

291
MUSC 253J Composition (Juried) Individual instruction focusing on the student's original compositions.
Course work includes the study of compositional techniques, analysis of relevant works, and
computer/MIDI/synthesizer technologies. The course is particularly directed toward the major who wishes
to pursue the composition option in the Senior Integrative Exercise. Prerequisite: Music 220, or two courses
from Music 221, Music 222 or Music 223 or instructor consent. 2 credits; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Alican
Camci, Andrea Mazzariello
MUSC 255 Violin Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2 credits; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Hector L
Valdivia, Natalia Moiseeva, Susan M Crawford
MUSC 255J Violin (Juried) Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2 credits; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Hector L
Valdivia, Natalia Moiseeva, Susan M Crawford
MUSC 256 Viola Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2 credits; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Hector L
Valdivia, Natalia Moiseeva, Susan M Crawford
MUSC 256J Viola (Juried) Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2 credits; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Hector L
Valdivia, Natalia Moiseeva, Susan M Crawford
MUSC 257 Cello Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2 credits; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Thomas
Rosenberg, Greg C Byers
MUSC 257J Cello (Juried) Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2 credits; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Thomas
Rosenberg, Greg C Byers
MUSC 258 Classical String Bass The study of the acoustic string bass in the Classical style. Prerequisite:
Instructor Permission. 2 credits; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Connie K Martin
MUSC 258J Classical String Bass (Juried) The study of the acoustic string bass in the Classical style.
Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2 credits; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Connie K Martin
MUSC 259 Flute Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2 credits; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Martha N
Jamsa
MUSC 259J Flute (Juried) Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2 credits; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Martha N
Jamsa
MUSC 260 Oboe/English Horn Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2 credits; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter,
Spring; Merilee I Klemp
MUSC 260J Oboe/English Horn (Juried) Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2 credits; ARP; Fall, Winter,
Spring; Merilee I Klemp
MUSC 261 Clarinet Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2 credits; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Nina E
Olsen
MUSC 261J Clarinet (Juried) Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2 credits; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Nina E
Olsen
MUSC 262 Saxophone Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2 credits; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring;
Greg Keel
MUSC 262J Saxophone (Juried) Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2 credits; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Greg
Keel

292
MUSC 263 Bassoon Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2 credits; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring
MUSC 263J Bassoon (Juried) Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2 credits; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring
MUSC 264 French Horn Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2 credits; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring;
Gwen M Anderson
MUSC 264J French Horn (Juried) Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2 credits; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring;
Gwen M Anderson
MUSC 265 Trumpet Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2 credits; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Lynn B
Deichert
MUSC 265J Trumpet (Juried) Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2 credits; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Lynn B
Deichert
MUSC 266 Trombone/Euphonium Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2 credits; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter,
Spring; Carson A King‐Fournier
MUSC 266J Trombone/Euphonium (Juried) Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2 credits; ARP; Fall, Winter,
Spring; Carson A King‐Fournier
MUSC 267 Tuba Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2 credits; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Carson A
King‐Fournier
MUSC 267J Tuba (Juried) Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2 credits; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Carson A
King‐Fournier
MUSC 268 Orchestral Percussion Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2 credits; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter,
Spring
MUSC 268J Orchestral Percussion (Juried) Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2 credits; ARP; Fall, Winter,
Spring
MUSC 269 Harp Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2 credits; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Elinor
Niemisto
MUSC 269J Harp (Juried) Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2 credits; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Elinor
Niemisto
MUSC 270 Harpsichord Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2 credits; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring;
Janean A Hall
MUSC 270J Harpsichord (Juried) Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2 credits; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring;
Janean A Hall
MUSC 271 Organ Basic piano skills required. Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2 credits; S/CR/NC; ARP;
Fall, Winter, Spring; Janean A Hall
MUSC 271J Organ (Juried) Basic piano skills required. Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2 credits; ARP;
Fall, Winter, Spring; Janean A Hall
MUSC 272 Oud Advanced study of the Arab oud. Instruments are provided. Instructor's permission
required. Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2 credits; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Yaron Klein

293
MUSC 272J Oud (Juried) Advanced study of the Arab oud. Instruments are provided. Instructor's permission
required. Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2 credits; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Yaron Klein
MUSC 274 Recorder Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2 credits; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring
MUSC 274J Recorder (Juried) Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2 credits; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring
MUSC 275 Jazz Piano Study the tools for learning the jazz "language." Learn to improvise through scale and
mode study, transcription, and composition. Turn chord symbols into chord voicings and accompaniment.
Explore the blues, jazz "standards," and today's music. Materials: staff paper, The Real Book, vol. 1, or
similar fake book, and the app iReal Pro. Weekly studio class required. Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2
credits; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Laura S Caviani
MUSC 275J Jazz Piano (Juried) Study the tools for learning the jazz "language." Learn to improvise through
scale and mode study, transcription, and composition. Turn chord symbols into chord voicings and
accompaniment. Explore the blues, jazz "standards," and today's music. Materials: staff paper, The Real
Book, vol. 1, or similar fake book, and the app iReal Pro. Weekly studio class required. Prerequisite:
Instructor Permission. 2 credits; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Laura S Caviani
MUSC 276 Electric & Acoustic Bass The study of either electric bass guitar or acoustic string bass in all
contemporary styles including rock, jazz, pop, rap, and reggae. Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2
credits; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Travis J Schilling
MUSC 276J Electric & Acoustic Bass (Juried) The study of either electric bass guitar or acoustic string bass in
all contemporary styles including rock, jazz, pop, rap, and reggae. Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2
credits; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Travis J Schilling
MUSC 277 Jazz and Blues Guitar Study of chord voicings, accompanimental techniques, and solo guitar
performance in the jazz idiom. Prerequisites: previous study of guitar and the ability to read music, or the
permission of the instructor. Students must provide their own instruments. Prerequisite: Instructor
Permission. 2 credits; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Zacc Harris
MUSC 277J Jazz and Blues Guitar (Juried) Study of chord voicings, accompanimental techniques, and solo
guitar performance in the jazz idiom. Prerequisites: previous study of guitar and the ability to read music, or
the permission of the instructor. Students must provide their own instruments. Prerequisite: Instructor
Permission. 2 credits; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Zacc Harris
MUSC 278 Drum Set Instruction Drum Set Instruction on/in jazz and popular drumming styles which use the
standard drum set. Equipment available for registered students. Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2
credits; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Dave Schmalenberger
MUSC 278J Drum Set Instruction (Juried) Drum Set Instruction on/in jazz and popular drumming styles
which use the standard drum set. Equipment available for registered students. Prerequisite: Instructor
Permission. 2 credits; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Dave Schmalenberger
MUSC 279 Jazz Improvisation The study of the basic grammar and syntax of jazz improvisation styles,
including transcribing solos, chord/scale materials and melodic patterns. Weekly studio class participation
required. Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2 credits; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Laura S Caviani
MUSC 279J Jazz Improvisation (Juried) The study of the basic grammar and syntax of jazz improvisation
styles, including transcribing solos, chord/scale materials and melodic patterns. Weekly studio class

294
participation is required. Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2 credits; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Laura S
Caviani
MUSC 280 Raga: Vocal or Instrumental Study of Hindustani Music Beginning, intermediate, and advanced
students of voice, guitar, violin, flute, clarinet, etc., approach raga from their current level of musicianship.
In all cases, traditional practical instruction is complemented by some theoretical and philosophical
exploration of the underpinnings of the music. Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2 credits; S/CR/NC; ARP;
Fall, Winter, Spring; David S Whetstone
MUSC 280J Raga:Voc/Instr Study Hindustani (Juried) Beginning, intermediate, and advanced students of
voice, guitar, violin, flute, clarinet, etc., approach raga from their current level of musicianship. In all cases,
traditional practical instruction is complemented by some theoretical and philosophical exploration of the
underpinnings of the music. Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2 credits; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; David S
Whetstone
MUSC 281 Sitar Beginning through advanced study of sitar in the gayaki ang style of Ustad Vilayat Khan.
Previous musical experience is not necessary. Sitars are provided. Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2
credits; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; David S Whetstone
MUSC 281J Sitar (Juried) Beginning through advanced study of sitar in the gayaki ang style of Ustad Vilayat
Khan. Previous musical experience is not necessary. Sitars are provided. Prerequisite: Instructor Permission.
2 credits; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; David S Whetstone
MUSC 282 Chinese Musical Instruments Beginning through advanced study on traditional Chinese
instruments, pipa (Chinese lute), erhu (Chinese violin), guzheng (Chinese zither), zhongruan (Chinese moon
guitar), hulusi, bawu and dizi (Chinese bamboo flutes). Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2 credits;
S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Gao Hong
MUSC 282J Chinese Musical Instruments (Juried) Beginning through advanced study on traditional Chinese
instruments, pipa (Chinese lute), erhu (Chinese violin), guzheng (Chinese zither), zhongruan (Chinese moon
guitar), hulusi, bawu and dizi (Chinese bamboo flutes). Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2 credits; ARP;
Fall, Winter, Spring; Gao Hong
MUSC 283 World Drumming Instruction World drumming instruction in various ethnic drumming styles
including West African (Ghanaian instruments), Cuban (congas), North Indian (tabla) and Middle Eastern
(dumbek). Equipment available for registered students. Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2 credits;
S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring
MUSC 283J World Drumming Instruction (Juried) World drumming instruction in various ethnic drumming
styles including West African (Ghanaian instruments), Cuban (congas), North Indian (tabla) and Middle
Eastern (dumbek). Equipment available for registered students. Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2
credits; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring
MUSC 284J American Folk Instrument (Juried) Beginning to advanced study of technique and
improvisational styles on American folk instruments. Students may study 5‐string banjo (bluegrass or
clawhammer style), bluegrass guitar, Dobro©, fiddle (violin, viola, cello), bass, ukulele, mandolin, and
accordion. The Music Department has a single mandolin, fiddle, banjo, and guitar (and two ukuleles)
available for shared use by enrolled students unable to provide their own instruments. Prerequisite:
Instructor Permission. 2 credits; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Mark Kreitzer

295
MUSC 284 American Folk Instruments Beginning to advanced study of technique and improvisational styles
on American folk instruments. Students may study 5‐string banjo (bluegrass or clawhammer style),
bluegrass guitar, Dobro©, fiddle (violin, viola, cello), bass, ukulele, mandolin, and accordion. The Music
Department has a single mandolin, fiddle, banjo, and guitar (and two ukuleles) available for shared use by
enrolled students unable to provide their own instruments. Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2 credits;
S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Mark Kreitzer
MUSC 299 Recital A public music recital of a minimum of thirty minutes of solo performance (some
chamber music may be included). Students enrolling in 299 do so in lieu of registering for applied lessons;
299 includes nine one‐hour lessons. Normally 299 would be taken in the junior or senior year, and is
repeatable one time. Fees and financial aid for 299 are the same as for two‐credit applied lessons.
Prerequisite: Permission of department. At least two terms of juried lessons at the 200 level. Students must
have completed recital form and permission of the Music Department the term prior to the recital. 3
credits; ARP; Not offered 2022‐23
MUSC 308 Seminar in Music Analysis An introduction to advanced analytical techniques for larger formal
structure in Western Art Music repertoire from the classic, romantic and early twentieth century. Musical
forms to be considered are binary, ternary, rondo, and variation forms, with particular emphasis on
theories and analyses of sonata forms of eighteenth and nineteenth century music. Prerequisite: Music 110
or 204 or Instructor consent. 6 credits; LA; Not offered 2022‐23
MUSC 313 Video Game Music: History, Interpretation, Practice Over the decades, video game music has
evolved from simple beeps and boops into a genre that has garnered millions of fans worldwide. This
course traces the history of video game music aesthetics and technology. We will consider how it relates to
a variety of musical traditions and engages with broader social issues. We will learn to listen for loops,
styles, structures, and function in games via direct engagement with primary sources: the games
themselves. The course culminates in the practical application of knowledge via a creative
project. Prerequisite: Music 110 and/or Music 204. 6 credits; LA, WR2; Spring; Brooke H McCorkle
MUSC 334 Marvin Gaye This is a research‐based course focused on the music and creative practices of
Marvin Gaye, one of the most famous and successful popular vocalists of the 1960s and 1970s. We will
begin with a furious survey of Gaye’s life and music, and move quickly into more critical readings. Along the
way, students will develop individual research topics with the assistance of the instructor, and present
findings to the group on a weekly basis. The seminar will culminate with individual student research
presentations and a well‐crafted research paper on a topic related to Gaye. Prerequisite: The ability to read
music and a previous music course, or instructor consent. 6 credits; LA, WR2, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
MUSC 337 Music in Social Movements How, specifically, is music instrumental in social change? What
musical choices are made, and by whom? How are new musics made, and old musics repackaged, to help
mobilize social movements and create collective identity? We'll approach these questions through the work
of diverse scholars and participants, through focused listening, and ultimately through guided student
research projects. Among the social/musical movements we'll consider: Nueva cancíon, Rastafari, anti‐
Apartheid; the labor, civil rights, women's, anti‐war, anti‐nuclear and environmental movements, the Black
Arts Movement, American Indian, Jesus, Hippie, and white nationalist Movements, and Black Lives Matter.
No musical experience or previous coursework required. 6 credits; WR2, LA, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
MUSC 338 Sonic Spectacles in Minnesota and Beyond: Music as Heritage In the last fifty years, governments
and transnational entities such as the United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) have increasingly called to safeguard cultural practices and historic buildings around the world.

296
Through trial and error, social scientists and policymakers have realized that such cultural heritage
preservation programs come with unforeseen consequences, especially regarding musical performance and
the communities that practice such traditions. This course is divided into two sections. First, we will
concentrate on case studies from around the world, considering the advantages, detriments, and best
practices for recognizing and celebrating music as heritage. We will debate questions such as: What is
heritage? How can something ephemeral such as music be ‘conserved’ for generations to come? What role
does the West play in shaping musical practices around the world, and for who do we want to ‘save’ the
music? Who makes decisions of what music should or should not be safeguarded, and what are the
implications for local practitioners? Second, we will explore music festivals and other music heritage
projects specifically in Minnesota. Learning from the mistakes of the past, the course will culminate with a
collaborative class project that will contribute to a sensitive yet productive endeavor to document oral
histories of musicians, or plan a festival/performance on campus that highlights musical life in and around
Northfield. 6 credits; LA, WR2, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
MUSC 341 Rock Lab and Lab This class combines performance and academic study of rock music. In the first
half of the course, we will learn to perform simple songs in small‐group coaching sessions with a polished
public performance as a midterm goal. During the second half of the course, we will make recordings of
these performances. Throughout the term, we will accompany performance and recording activities with
readings and discussion about aesthetics, performance practice in rock music, and mediation of recording
techniques, all extraordinarily rich topics in popular music studies. No performance experience is needed.
The course will accommodate students with a range of experience. Students will be grouped according to
background, interest, and ability. There is a required hands‐on laboratory component, which will be
assigned before the start of the course. In these smaller groups, students will perform, record, and
work with sound in small groups. Work will include experimentation with electric instruments, amplifiers,
synthesizers, microphones, recording techniques, performance practice issues, musical production, mixing,
and mastering. 6 credits; ARP, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
MUSC 342 Creative Music Performance Seminar Over the course of the term, each student will prepare the
performance of a solo work, informed by the exploration of sources, comparison of recordings, score
analysis, and performance science. Group meetings explore the pedagogy of musical, psychological, and
intellectual preparation, and will guide improvement in technical and musical consistency during
performance. Open to performers of all genres of applied music taught in the Carleton music department.
Prerequisite: One term of 2 credit juried lessons on any instrument/voice or permission of instructor. 3
credits; ARP; Winter; Hector L Valdivia
MUSC 400 Integrative Exercise Required of senior majors. The integrative exercise may be fulfilled by
completion of a significant composition, performance, or research‐paper project. Students who wish to
fulfill Music 400 with such projects must meet department‐specified qualifying criteria. 6 credits; S/NC;
Fall, Winter; Andy A Flory

Neuroscience
Requirements for the Neuroscience Minor
The Neuroscience Minor requires 48 credits as follows:


Core Courses (21 credits required): AP Biology does not count.

297
o
o
o
o

BIOL 125 Genes, Evolution, and Development and Lab
NEUR 127 Foundations in Neuroscience and Lab
NEUR 238 Neurons, Circuits and Behavior
NEUR 239 Neurons, Circuits and Behavior Lab



Capstone (3 credits):
o NEUR 395 Neuroscience Capstone Seminar



Electives (24 credits required from the list below):

o
o
o
o

A single course may fulfill more than one requirement, for example Biology 332 would fulfill
both the 300 level and the Biology requirement
At least 6 credits from Biology
At least 6 credits from Psychology
At least 6 credits at 300 level
o

































BIOL 240 Genetics
BIOL 248 Behavioral Ecology
BIOL 272 Integrative Animal Physiology
BIOL 280 Cell Biology
BIOL 281 Cell Biology Laboratory
BIOL 332 Human Physiology
BIOL 333 Human Physiology Laboratory
BIOL 342 Animal Developmental Biology (not offered in 2022‐23)
BIOL 343 Animal Developmental Biology Laboratory (not offered in 2022‐
23)
BIOL 365 Seminar: Topics in Neuroscience
BIOL 368 Seminar: Developmental Neurobiology
BIOL 379 Seminar: Behavioral Genetics
BIOL 386 Neurobiology (not offered in 2022‐23)
CS 254 Computability and Complexity
CS 321 Making Decisions with Artificial Intelligence
MUSC 227 Perception and Cognition of Music
MUSC 228 Perception and Cognition of Music Lab
PHIL 225 Philosophy of Mind (not offered in 2022‐23)
PSYC 210 Psychology of Learning and Memory
PSYC 211 Laboratory Research Methods in Learning and Memory
PSYC 216 Behavioral Neuroscience
PSYC 217 Laboratory Research Methods in Behavioral Neuroscience
PSYC 218 Hormones, Brain, and Behavior
PSYC 220 Sensation and Perception
PSYC 260 Health Psychology (not offered in 2022‐23)
PSYC 263 Sleep and Dreaming
PSYC 267 Clinical Neuroscience (not offered in 2022‐23)
PSYC 318 Psychopharmacology
PSYC 366 Cognitive Neuroscience (not offered in 2022‐23)
PSYC 367 Neuropsychology of Aging
PSYC 370 Behavioral Neuroimmunology

298



PSYC 371 Evolutionary and Developmental Trends in Cognition (not offered
in 2022‐23)
PSYC 379 Child and Adolescent Psychiatry (not offered in 2022‐23)

Neuroscience Courses
NEUR 099 Fundamentals of Neuroscience Throughout this course, students will receive an experiential
overview of the field of neuroscience. The core of this program is an in‐depth introduction to Neuroscience,
where students will dive into the anatomy, physiology, and chemistry of the brain. Students will engage in
team‐based learning and explore research approaches. The course will culminate with a symposium where
students share the results of their work with each other and the broader community. 6 credits, S/Cr/NC;
NE, Summer, Lawrence Wichlinski
NEUR 127 Foundations in Neuroscience and Lab This course is an introduction to basic neural function.
Topics include neural transmission, development of the nervous system, anatomy, sensory systems,
learning and the corresponding change in the brain, and the role of the nervous system in behavior. Team‐
based learning will be used to understand the experiments that shape current knowledge. 6 credits; LS,
QRE; Fall; Eric D Hoopfer, Sarah H Meerts
NEUR 238 Neurons, Circuits and Behavior Neurons are the building blocks of the nervous system. Molecular
and cellular neuroscience seeks to understand the fundamental principles that govern how neurons
function, how they communicate with each other, and how they assemble into circuits that generate
behavior. This course focuses on the molecular and cellular basis of nervous system function from the level
of genes and molecules to neural circuits and behavior. We will take an integrative approach to examine
the genetic, molecular and cellular mechanisms that underlie neuronal communication, the molecular basis
of sensation and innate behaviors, neural plasticity, and nervous system disorders. This course will
emphasize the experimental evidence and techniques that have built our understanding of the molecular
and cellular basis of behavior through team‐based learning, analysis of primary literature papers and
laboratory experimentation. A grade of C‐ or better must be earned in both Neuroscience 238 and 239 to
satisfy the LS requirement. Prerequisite: Neuroscience 127 or Biology 125.; Concurrent registration in
Neuroscience 239. 6 credits; LS, QRE; Spring; Eric D Hoopfer
NEUR 239 Neurons, Circuits and Behavior Lab This laboratory course will provide experience in performing
experiments to elucidate the structure and function neurons and neural circuits using classical and cutting‐
edge techniques. Students will apply these techniques to develop and carry out an independent research
project. Prerequisite: Concurrent registration in Neuroscience 238 required. 2 credits; NE; Spring; Eric D
Hoopfer
NEUR 395 Neuroscience Capstone Seminar This capstone seminar will cover current approaches and
techniques in the field of neuroscience. Guest speakers in neuroscience and related areas will present their
research. Prerequisite: Biology 125, Neuroscience 127, Neuroscience 238 & 239, open only to seniors. 3
credits; S/CR/NC; NE; Spring; Sarah H Meerts

Philosophy
Philosophy asks and attempts to answer questions about the nature of reality and our knowledge
about it, moral goodness, justice, beauty and freedom. In the context of liberal arts, we help students
develop critical thinking skills by focusing on argument construction and analysis. We offer a range

299

of courses in traditional areas of philosophy, such as epistemology and ethics, as well as courses in
history of philosophy and applied philosophy.
Our courses, except for the comps, are open to both majors and non-majors, although some upper
level courses may require prior exposure to philosophy.
Requirements for the Philosophy Major
72 credits in philosophy, including:
1. Core Courses (24 credits)





PHIL 210 Logic
PHIL 213 Ethics
PHIL 270 Ancient Greek Philosophy
PHIL 272 Early Modern Philosophy

2. Theoretical Philosophy Area Requirement (6 credits) Theoretical philosophy courses include,
but are not limited to, courses that predominantly cover themes from metaphysics, epistemology,
the philosophy of language, the philosophy of science, logic, or the philosophy of mind.
One course at or above 200-level in theoretical philosophy (6 credits)


















IDSC 250 Color!
PHIL 203 Bias, Belief, Community, Emotion
PHIL 211 Being, Time and Identity
PHIL 217 Reason in Context: Limitations and Possibilities (not offered in 2022‐23)
PHIL 223 Philosophy of Language (not offered in 2022‐23)
PHIL 225 Philosophy of Mind (not offered in 2022‐23)
PHIL 226 Love and Friendship (not offered in 2022‐23)
PHIL 236 Proof, Knowledge, and Understanding in Mathematics (not offered in 2022‐23)
PHIL 251 Evidence, Objectivity, and Realism in the Sciences (not offered in 2022‐23)
PHIL 255 Comparative Philosophy
PHIL 273 Kant's Metaphysics (not offered in 2022‐23)
PHIL 274 Existentialism
PHIL 287 Conspiracy Theories and Dogmatism (not offered in 2022‐23)
PHIL 297 Kant’s Philosophy of Mind (not offered in 2022‐23)
PHIL 306 Causation and Explanation
PHIL 319 Philosophy of Quantum Mechanics (not offered in 2022‐23)
PHIL 373 Reptiles and Demons

3. Practical Philosophy/Value Theory Area Requirement (6 credits). Practical Philosophy/Value
Theory courses include, but are not limited to, courses that predominantly cover themes from ethics,
political philosophy, social philosophy, or aesthetics.
One course at or above 200-level in practical philosophy/value theory (6 credits)



PHIL 203 Bias, Belief, Community, Emotion
PHIL 218 Virtue Ethics (not offered in 2022‐23)

300









PHIL 221 Philosophy of Law (not offered in 2022‐23)
PHIL 222 Topics in Medical Ethics (not offered in 2022‐23)
PHIL 226 Love and Friendship (not offered in 2022‐23)
PHIL 228 Freedom and Alienation in Black American Philosophy (not offered in 2022‐23)
PHIL 232 Social and Political Philosophy (not offered in 2022‐23)
PHIL 255 Comparative Philosophy
PHIL 257 Contemporary Issues in Feminist Philosophy
PHIL 260 Critical Philosophy of Race (not offered in 2022‐23)

4. Advanced Courses (12 credits)


PHIL Advanced Courses (12 credits in Philosophy at the 300‐level, excluding PHIL 398 and 399)

5. Integrative Exercise (12 credits)




PHIL 398 Comps Proposal (3 credits)
PHIL 399 Senior Thesis (6 credits)
PHIL 400 Integrative Exercise (3 credits)

6. Philosophy Electives (12 credits)


12 additional credits in Philosophy

Courses cannot be double counted to meet more than one of the above requirements. That is, if a
student takes a 395 Advanced Seminar in the philosophy of mind, it cannot count as both a
theoretical philosophy distribution requirement (#2 above) and an advanced seminar.
No more than twelve credits at the 100-level counts toward the major.
Depending on each student's individual educational goals, up to one course from another
department can count toward the major. This is done in consultation with the chair of Philosophy.
Requirements for the Philosophy Minor
36 credits in Philosophy, including:






One course at the 100‐level (6 credits). This course can be an A&I seminar or one of the
department's regular Introduction to Philosophy courses.
Two courses from the following list (12 credits)
o Logic
o Ancient Philosophy
o Modern Philosophy
o Ethics
One advanced course (6 credits). This can be any philosophy course at the 300 level
Two electives (12 credits). At most one of these can come from the 100‐level.

Philosophy Courses
PHIL 100 Family Values: The Ethics of Being a Family Everyone has a family of one kind or another. Whether
you love them, hate them, or both at the same time, your family has played a huge role in making you the

301
person you are. That fact raises all kinds of interesting philosophical questions such as: what limits should
there be on how parents shape their kids' lives and values? Are there demands of justice that are in tension
with the way families are "normally" constituted? What duties do parents have to their children and vice
versa? And what makes a person someone else's parent or child in the first place‐‐genetics, commitment,
convention? This course will explore all these questions and more. 6 credits; AI, WR1, IDS; Fall; Daniel M
Groll
PHIL 100 Science, Faith and Rationality This seminar will introduce the student to the study of philosophy
through a consideration of various epistemic and metaphysical issues surrounding science and religion.
What distinguishes scientific inquiry from other areas of inquiry: Its subject matter, its method of inquiry, or
perhaps both? How does scientific belief differ from religious belief, in particular? Is the scientist
committed to substantive metaphysical assumptions? If so, what role do these assumptions play in
scientific investigation and how do they differ from religious dogma (if they do)? Our exploration of these
questions will involve the consideration of both classic and contemporary philosophical texts. 6 credits; AI,
WR1; Fall; Jason A Decker
PHIL 100 Utopias What would a perfect society look like? What ideals would it implement? What social evils
would it eliminate? This course explores some famous philosophical and literary utopias, such as Plato's
Republic, Thomas More's Utopia, Francis Bacon's New Atlantis, Ursula Le Guin's The Dispossessed, and
others. We will also consider some nightmarish counterparts of utopias, dystopias. One of the projects in
this course is a public performance, such as a speech or a short play. 6 credits; AI, WR1; Fall; Anna
Moltchanova
PHIL 105 The Complications of Heroism What does it mean to be heroic? Are heroes in the Western world
consistent across contexts and vantage points? In this introduction to philosophy, we explore some lauded
philosophical discussions on heroism, ethical complications, and shifts in the valuation of heroic and ethical
acts. Students will read contemporary and historical philosophical texts by figures such as Thomas Carlyle,
Søren Kierkegaard, Friedrich Nietzsche, and others. Students will explore illustrations of heroism by the
primary authors and we will explore counter examples that challenge these views. Finally, students are
invited to explore the meaning of heroism today utilizing the course's philosophical resources. 6 credits; HI,
WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
PHIL 113 The Individual and the Political Community Are human beings radically individual and atomic by
nature, political animals, or something else? However we answer that question, what difference does it
make for our understanding of the ways in which larger political communities come into existence and are
maintained? In this course we will explore these and related questions while reading two of the most
foundational works in political theory, Plato’s Republic and Hobbes’s Leviathan, as well as several
contemporary pieces influenced by these thinkers. 6 credits; HI, IS, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
PHIL 115 Skepticism, God, and Ethical Dilemmas If I can't rule out that I'm dreaming, does it follow that I
don't know that I'm in Minnesota right now? Are there sound arguments establishing either the existence
or non‐existence of God? If I can divert a train from one track to another so that only one person loses her
life instead of five, am I morally required to do so? In this course we will address questions concerning
skepticism, God, and moral dilemmas, and explore some of their interrelations. We will pay close attention
to issues of philosophical methodology along the way. 6 credits; HI, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
PHIL 116 Sensation, Induction, Abduction, Deduction, Seduction In every academic discipline, we make
theories and argue for and against them. This is as true of theology as of geology (and as true of phys ed as
of physics). What are the resources we have available to us in making these arguments? It's tempting to

302
split the terrain into (i) raw data, and (ii) rules of right reasoning for processing the data. The most obvious
source of raw data is sense experience, and the most obvious candidates for modes of right reasoning are
deduction, induction, and abduction. Some philosophers, however, think that sense perception is only one
of several sources of raw data (perhaps we also have a faculty of pure intuition or maybe a moral sense),
and others have doubted that we have any source of raw data at all. As for the modes of "right" reasoning,
Hume famously worried about our (in)ability to justify induction, and others have had similar worries about
abduction and even deduction. Can more be said on behalf of our most strongly held beliefs and belief‐
forming practices than simply that we find them seductive‐‐‐that we are attracted to them; that they
resonate with us? In this course, we'll use some classic historical and contemporary philosophical texts to
help us explore these and related issues. 6 credits; HI, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
PHIL 117 Reclaiming Argument Our lives are drenched in argument and persuasion. This course aims to
teach you how to deftly and ethically manage argument and persuasion in your own life. Our goals: to
develop your skill at recognizing how language can be used and misused as a tool for persuasion, by
teaching techniques from formal logic, linguistics, and argument‐mapping; and to show you how (and why)
to construct your own arguments with honesty and logical transparency. Our hope is that you will come to
see argument not primarily as a contest to be won or lost, but as something that should be “reclaimed” for
a more noble purpose: building genuine understanding between people, even across profound differences
of viewpoint. 6 credits; HI; Fall; Ned Hall
PHIL 119 Meaning of Life Does life have a meaning? To answer this, we will first inquire into more basic
questions about agency that provide a foundation for our topic: Is everything fated? Is fate compatible with
free will? Can we always do the right thing without moral remainder, or are there genuine moral dilemmas?
Are there grey zones of compromised responsibility due to structures of oppression, or other factors? How
do we know what lives are meaningful for us? Is there any objective truth about the meaning of life? After
developing your ideas on the answers to those questions, we will turn to various approaches to meaning in
life, both those that affirm meaning and deny it. We will cover, for example, approaches to the meaning of
life grounded in narrative, divinity, creativity, and more. 6 credits; HI, WR2; Winter; Hope C Sample
PHIL 122 Identity and Leadership Leaders who face tragedy and violence inspire others with their personal
narratives of self‐creation and meaning‐making. This course invites students to investigate the relationship
between the subjective meaning‐making experience and various manifestations of the ‘problem of evil’. We
will read a variety of texts that highlight narrative experiences of tragedy, self‐transformation, and models
of leadership as empowerment. The course approaches these topics from a variety of philosophical lenses
including: Existentialism, Feminist Philosophy, Africana Philosophy, Queer Studies, Disability Studies, and
Religious Studies. The texts of this course will include: Book of Job, Victor Frankl’s Man’s Search For
Meaning, Lucy Delaney’s From the Darkness Cometh the Light, Susan Brison’s Aftermath: Violence and the
Remaking of the Self, and Eli Clare’s Exile and Pride. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
PHIL 123 Topics in Medical Ethics This course examines a variety of topics in medical ethics. We begin with a
unit on pandemic ethics: Who should get ventilators when there aren't enough for everyone? Do medical
providers have a duty to treat during a pandemic? We then turn to the question "When is someone dead?"
and consider how different answers to that question affect arguments over organ procurement. Our third
unit is on the place of race, and racial judgments, in medicine. Is there a place for racial judgments in
medicine? Finally, we turn to the question of how to think about decision making in a clinical context: what
values are at play? And how should we think about disagreements between clinicians and patients? What
about disagreements between patient's past wishes and their current wishes? Not open to students who
have taken Philosophy 222. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23

303
PHIL 203 Bias, Belief, Community, Emotion What is important to individuals, how they see themselves and
others, and the kind of projects they pursue are shaped by traditional and moral frameworks they didn’t
choose. Individual selves are encumbered by their social environments and, in this sense, always ‘biased’,
but some forms of bias are pernicious because they produce patterns of inter and intra‐group domination
and oppression. We will explore various forms of intersubjectivity and its asymmetries through readings in
social ontology and social epistemology that theorize the construction of group and individual beliefs and
identities in the context of the social world they engender. 6 credits; HI, WR2, QRE, IDS; Spring; Anna
Moltchanova
PHIL 210 Logic The study of formal logic has obvious and direct applicability to a wide variety of disciplines
(including mathematics, computer science, linguistics, philosophy, cognitive science, and many others).
Indeed, the study of formal logic helps us to develop the tools and know‐how to think more clearly about
arguments and logical relationships in general; and arguments and logical relationships form the backbone
of any rational inquiry. In this course we will focus on propositional logic and predicate logic, and look at
the relationship that these have to ordinary language and thought. 6 credits; FSR; Spring; Jason A Decker
PHIL 211 Being, Time and Identity The aim of metaphysics has traditionally been to identify the nature and
structure of reality. The topics of this course are the topology of time, identity of things and individuals,
causality, free will, and the referents of general terms. We will read a variety of classic and contemporary
texts, which are organized topically. Prerequisite: 100‐level Philosophy course or instructor permission. 6
credits; HI, WR2; Winter; Anna Moltchanova
PHIL 213 Ethics How should we live? This is the fundamental question for the study of ethics. This course
looks at classic and contemporary answers to the fundamental question from Socrates to Kant to modern
day thinkers. Along the way, we consider slightly (but only slightly) more tractable questions such as: What
reason is there to be moral? Is there such a thing as moral knowledge (and if so, how do we get it)? What
are the fundamental principles of right and wrong (if there are any at all)? Is morality objective? 6 credits;
HI, WR2, IS; Spring; Daniel M Groll
PHIL 217 Reason in Context: Limitations and Possibilities Our reflection on significant human questions is
often (perhaps always) embedded within a larger set of cultural or personal theoretical commitments. Such
embeddedness suggests our reflection cannot achieve the standard of objectivity characteristic of a
traditional ideal of rationality. Is this realization to be welcomed insofar as it weakens traditional dogmatic
claims to truth and the associated implication that certain views or frameworks are superior to others? Or,
in spite of the unmooring of the philosophical tradition from set criteria, do we still find ourselves
committed to some ordering of rank and, if so, how do we make sense of this? In this course we'll examine
these questions as they arise in the writings of Nietzsche, Heidegger and other continental philosophers.
We will devote part of the course to the ancient sources (Plato and Aristotle) with whom the continental
philosophers are in conversation. 6 credits; HI, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
PHIL 218 Virtue Ethics What is a good human life? Who is a good person? From the time of Plato and
Aristotle onwards, many philosophers have thought about these questions in terms of two central ideas.
Virtues, such as justice or courage, make us a certain type of person (they give us a certain character).
Wisdom enables us to make good judgments about how to act. How do virtue and wisdom work together
to produce a good human life? Is a good life the same as a happy life? We will reflect on these and related
questions as we read texts from Alasdair MacIntyre, Philippa Foot, and other significant thinkers in the
contemporary virtue ethics tradition. We will also consider the application of virtue ethics to specific areas,
such as environmental ethics, as well as the parallels between Western virtue ethics and the tradition of
Confucianism in ancient China. 6 credits; HI, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23

304
PHIL 221 Philosophy of Law This course provides students with an opportunity to engage actively in a
discussion of theoretical questions about law. We will consider the nature of law as it is presented by
natural law theory, legal positivism and legal realism. Then we will deal with responsibility and punishment,
and challenges to the idea of the primacy of individual rights from legal paternalism and moralism. We will
next inquire into the explanations of why individuals should obey the law, and conditions under which civil
disobedience is justified. Finally, we will discuss issues raised by feminist legal theory and some theories of
minority rights. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
PHIL 222 Topics in Medical Ethics This course examines a variety of topics in medical ethics. We begin with a
unit on pandemic ethics: Who should get ventilators when there aren't enough for everyone? Do medical
providers have a duty to treat during a pandemic? We then turn to the question "When is someone dead?"
and consider how different answers to that question affect arguments over organ procurement. Our third
unit is on the place of race, and racial judgments, in medicine. Is there a place for racial judgments in
medicine? Finally, we turn to the question of how to think about decision making in a clinical context: what
values are at play? And how should we think about disagreements between clinicians and patients? What
about disagreements between patient's past wishes and their current wishes? 6 credits; HI, WR2, IDS; Not
offered 2022‐23
PHIL 223 Philosophy of Language In this course we will look at how philosophers have tried to understand
language and its connection with human thought and communication. The course will be split into two
parts: Semantics and Pragmatics. In the first part, we'll look at general features of linguistic expressions like
meaning and reference. In the second part, we'll look at the various ways in which speakers use language.
Topics to be considered in the second part include speech acts, implicature, and presupposition. 6 credits;
HI, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
PHIL 225 Philosophy of Mind What is the relationship between the mind and the brain? Are they identical?
Or is there mental "stuff" in addition to physical stuff? Or perhaps some physical stuff has irreducibly
mental properties? These, and related questions, are explored by philosophers under the heading of "the
mind‐body problem." In this course, we will start with these questions, looking at classical and
contemporary defenses of both materialism and dualism. This investigation will lead us to other important
questions such as: What is the nature of mental representation, what is consciousness, and could a robot
have conscious states and mental representations? 6 credits; HI, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
PHIL 226 Love and Friendship This course will consider various philosophical views on the nature of love
and friendship. It will focus on both the history of philosophical thinking about these notions from Plato and
Aristotle to the twentieth century and a variety of contemporary views on the meaning of love and
friendship that derive their insight from the most recent studies of emotion, agency, action, rationality,
moral value, and motivation. We will also look at the variations in the understanding of love and friendship
among the members of the same culture and across cultures. 6 credits; HI, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
PHIL 228 Freedom and Alienation in Black American Philosophy The struggle of freedom against forms of
alienation is both a historical and contemporary characteristic of Black/African‐American philosophy. In this
course we will explore how a variety of Black/African‐American philosophers theorize these concepts. The
aim of the course is to both offer resources for familiarizing students with African‐American philosophers
and develop an appreciation for critical philosophical voices in the Black intellectual tradition. The course
will range from slave narratives, reconstruction, and civil rights to contemporary prison abolitionism,
intersectionality, and afro‐pessimism. The texts of the course will include: Angela Davis’ Lectures on
Liberation, Frederick Douglass’ Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, Ida B. Wells Southern
Horrors, George Yancy’s African‐American Philosophers 17 Conversations, and Afro‐Pessimism: An

305
Introduction. As well as select articles from historical and contemporary Black/African‐American
philosophers. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
PHIL 232 Social and Political Philosophy We will study several prominent late twentieth century
philosophers writing about social and political justice and representing a variety of views, such as liberalism,
socialism, libertarianism, communitarianism, feminism and post‐modernism. The following are some of the
authors we will read: John Rawls, Gerald Cohen, Robert Nozick, Charles Taylor, Iris Marion Young, Seyla
Benhabib, Jurgen Habermas, Jean‐Francois Lyotard. 6 credits; HI, WR2, QRE, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
PHIL 236 Proof, Knowledge, and Understanding in Mathematics An introduction to the philosophy of
mathematics focusing on the history and development of mathematical proofs. The course is organized
around three central questions: i. What is the relationship between a mathematical proof and our
knowledge of the theorem that it proves? ii. Do some mathematical proofs go beyond establishing the truth
of their theorems and actually explain why the theorems are true? iii. How has our mathematical
knowledge grown throughout history? We will first address these questions by reading and discussing Imre
Lakatos's book Proofs and Refutations. We will continue with readings drawn from classic and
contemporary sources in the history and philosophy of mathematics. This course has no formal
prerequisites, though it does presuppose a willingness to read, assess, and write about mathematical
proofs. 6 credits; HI, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
PHIL 251 Evidence, Objectivity, and Realism in the Sciences Science gives us an objective view of ourselves
and the world we live in. Or does it? In this course, we’ll pursue some fundamental questions about the
nature of the empirical sciences. What makes something a science? What kinds of evidence are there for
scientific claims? What, if anything, makes science objective? The main concepts of the course will be
illustrated using examples of scientific reasoning from a range of sciences, including biology (e.g., research
on gender), climate science (e.g., whether hurricanes are getting more damaging over time), and physics
(e.g., the seventeenth century revolution in astronomy). One theme of the course will be feminist critiques
of scientific practices and of traditional philosophy of science. 6 credits; HI, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
PHIL 255 Comparative Philosophy Philosophical problems are motivated by human concerns that are often
shared across cultures. In this course, we will analyze how philosophers from different traditions have
approached problems concerning the structure of reality, the nature of knowledge and experience, and
how we ought to live. We will identify how their cultural context impacts their resolution of metaphysical,
epistemic, and ethical problems. Moreover, beyond comparing and contrasting, we will consider how
philosophers from different philosophical traditions could have learned from or inspired one another if they
had engaged with one another. By engaging in this cross‐cultural and critical investigation, we will gain a
broader view of how philosophy has been used to make sense of the world and its limitations and
prospects. 6 credits; HI, IS, WR2; Spring; Hope C Sample
PHIL 257 Contemporary Issues in Feminist Philosophy This course provides a survey of contemporary issues
in feminist philosophy as well as a selection of feminist theories of gender. For the latter, we will cover
intersectional theory, narrative theory, and feminist theories of embodiment, among others. For the
former, we will attempt to answer the following kinds of questions in this course: How does feminism
interact with nationalism? How do categories of gender, sex, sexuality, race, nationality, and class affect our
willingness to attribute knowledge or epistemic authority to others? How does the application of these
categories affect our awareness of the social spaces that we inhabit? How do we know our sexual
orientation? What is oppression? Should gender impact custody decisions? How does the criminal justice
system reinforce structures of oppression? This course will ask students to analyze feminist arguments that
support diverse answers to these questions and more. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IDS; Fall; Hope C Sample

306
PHIL 260 Critical Philosophy of Race This course serves as an introduction to the philosophical subfield of
Critical Philosophy of Race. In this course students examine issues raised by the concept of race, practices
and methods of racialization, and the persistence of racism across the world despite efforts to end it. This
method of doing philosophy opposes racism in all forms; it rejects racial pseudoscience and religious
determinism, biological racialism, all forms of racial supremacy, and all forms of racial eliminativism.
Instead, critical philosophy of race aims to help students understand how race is constructed and the multi‐
faced ways it operates in the world today. 6 credits; HI, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
PHIL 270 Ancient Philosophy Is there a key to a happy and successful human life? If so, how do you acquire
it? Ancient philosophers thought the key was virtue and that your chances of obtaining it depend on the
sort of life you lead. In this course we’ll examine what these philosophers meant by virtue and how they
understood its implications for your everyday life. We will situate the ancient understanding of virtue in the
context of larger questions of metaphysics (the nature of being and reality), psychology, and ethics, as they
arise in foundational works from Plato, Aristotle, and the Stoics. 6 credits; HI, IS, WR2; Fall; Daniel M Groll
PHIL 272 Early Modern Philosophy: Seventeenth and Eighteenth Century Philosophy We will read selections
of writings from various seventeenth and eighteenth century philosophers on metaphysics, epistemology,
and ethics. This course will not be limited to any geographic region, as it is open to philosophical traditions
from Europe, the Americas, Africa, and Asia. On the metaphysical side, we will cover topics such as time
and space, freedom, and divinity. Ethical issues that we will cover include, but are not limited to, moral
responsibility, virtue, suffering, and the good life. Further, we will cover epistemic issues concerning belief,
perception, and knowledge. In sum, we will gain a deeper insight into perennial philosophical problems as
well as an awareness of the assumptions that drive their solutions, given the author’s personal, social,
political, and philosophical context. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IS; Winter; Hope C Sample
PHIL 273 Kant's Metaphysics In this course we aim to understand the metaphysics and the theory of
cognition developed by Immanuel Kant in his monumental work, Critique of Pure Reason. Some of the main
questions Kant addresses: How does the mind represent the world? Can we distinguish the way things
appear to us from the way they are in themselves? What are space and time? Does every event have a
cause? Is it possible to have knowledge independent of experience? We will think about these questions
and attempt to shed light on Kant’s systematic answers to them by means of careful reading and
interpretation of Kant’s text. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
PHIL 274 Existentialism We will consider the emergence and development of major themes of
existentialism in the works of Kierkegaard and Nietzsche, as well as "classical" existentialists such as
Heidegger, Sartre and De Beauvoir. We will discuss key issues put forward by the existentialist movement,
such as "the question of being" and human historicity, freedom and responsibility and look at how different
authors analyzed the nature and ambitions of the Self and diverse aspects of subjectivity. 6 credits; HI,
WR2, IS; Winter; Anna Moltchanova
PHIL 287 Conspiracy Theories and Dogmatism Conspiracy theories hit us where we are intellectually most
vulnerable. Like global skeptical scenarios that occupy and perplex philosophers, they suggest a gap
between appearance and reality; they suggest that we have formed our beliefs on the basis of massively
misleading evidence. Often, they concern possibilities that we have never even considered, let alone
properly assessed. The volume of evidence and arguments that conspiracy theorists offer for their theories
can be vast and intricate. Yet it seems that, in some cases, we are perfectly within our epistemic rights in
dogmatically ignoring or avoiding this volume of evidence and arguments. This won't do as a general policy,
though, for history forces us to admit that sometimes conspiracy theorists are right. Theories like Bayesian
formal epistemology that seem well‐suited to guide us through these difficult waters often make our

307
situation even more puzzling and problematic. To make fresh headway on these issues, this course will look
critically at how philosophers, psychologists and political scientists have approached conspiracy theories
and conspiracy theorists. We will consider topics such as cognitive dysfunction and bias, epistemic trust,
peer disagreement, the puzzle of misleading evidence, dogmatism, and formal theories of probabilistic
reasoning. Along the way we will have occasion to consider many strange and fascinating conspiracy
theories‐‐‐a few of which have turned out to be true. 6 credits; HI, WR2, QRE; Not offered 2022‐23
PHIL 289 Death, Dinner, and Discussion We're all going to die. We all know that. But we seem to spend a lot
of our lives avoiding thinking and talking about it. This course aims to remedy that. We will meet weekly to
talk about death and, more specifically, the choices we think we might want to make about how we will die
and how we want to live at the end of our lives. Students in the class will be asked to think seriously and
share their thoughts about these issues. Students will read some popular books that invite people to think
about the end of their lives, hold a Death Over Dinner discussion as a class (with the professor), and hold
(and write about) a Death Over Dinner discussion with some of their peers outside of class. Be ready to talk
and to listen! We'll provide the Kleenex. 3 credits; S/CR/NC; NE; Winter, Spring; Daniel M Groll
PHIL 297 Kant’s Philosophy of Mind In this class, we will read selections from various works by Kant on the
structure of perception, aesthetic judgment, moral decision‐making, and more as time permits! Kant’s
contributions to philosophy of mind cover a diverse array of aspects of consciousness and have deeply
influenced the history of philosophy. His phenomenological reflections on the perception of space and time
and the basic categories through which we judge inspired subsequent Kantian philosophers and even
contemporary debates about the role of concepts in perception. Further, Kant’s account of judgments of
beauty and the sublime not only influenced his successors, but also provide essential background for
contemporary aesthetics. In addition, Kant’s universal law formulation of his central moral principle
provides an innovative way to understand moral decision making in terms of what can be collectively
rationally acted upon. 6 credits; Not offered 2022‐23
PHIL 299 Ethics Bowl This course will prepare a team or two from Carleton to participate in the regional
Ethics Bowl tournament. Ethics Bowl teams prepare analyses of contemporary moral and political issues
which they present, and defend, at the competition, while also engaging with the analyses of other teams.
While Ethics Bowl is a competition, the focus in our course will be on doing the research necessary to
understand the cases and then thinking through the cases together. Students do NOT have to partake in the
Ethics Bowl tournament in order to take (and pass!) the course. The class will meet once a week. Previous
Ethics Bowl experience is not required. Prerequisite: Instructor consent. 3 credits; S/CR/NC; NE; Fall; Daniel
M Groll
PHIL 303 Bias, Belief, Community, Emotion What is important to individuals, how they see themselves and
others, and the kind of projects they pursue are shaped by traditional and moral frameworks they didn’t
choose. Individual selves are encumbered by their social environments and, in this sense, always ‘biased’,
but some forms of bias are pernicious because they produce patterns of inter and intra‐group domination
and oppression. We will explore various forms of intersubjectivity and its asymmetries through readings in
social ontology and social epistemology that theorize the construction of group and individual beliefs and
identities in the context of the social world they engender. Prerequisite: One Previous Philosophy course or
instructor permission. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IDS, QRE; Not offered 2022‐23
PHIL 305 Frederick Douglass: The Philosophies of a Slave, Citizen, and Diplomat This course will be a study
of Frederick Douglass: A man born into American chattel slavery who liberated himself and lived to become
an abolitionist, orator, diplomat, and American hero. Through his autobiographies (Narrative of the Life of
Frederick Douglass 1845, My Bondage My Freedom 1855) and speeches (The Meaning of July Fourth for the

308
Negro 1852, We Welcome the Fifteenth Amendment 1869, Lessons of the Hour 1894), we will trace the
evolution of Douglass’ views on the abolition of slavery, American citizenship, political and moral
responsibility, and his lifetime of activist work for equality. Alongside these texts, we will read
contemporary philosophical literature that celebrates, contests, and critically highlights the significance of
Douglass’ philosophical legacy. The purpose of this course is help students underscore historical anti‐
discrimination philosophies and the diverse legacy of American philosophical figures. Prerequisite: One
prior course in Philosophy, Africana Studies, American Studies or instructor permission. 6 credits; HI, IDS;
Not offered 2022‐23
PHIL 306 Causation and Explanation Intimately related in deep but philosophically mysterious ways, the
paired concepts of causation and explanation structure how we think about the reality we inhabit and our
place in it, as well as our self‐understanding as inquirers. After all, when we investigate just about anything,
we aim to know not just the where and the when, but the how and the why. This seminar will introduce you
to some of the most important philosophical investigations into causation, explanation, and their
relationship to one another. Along the way, we’ll pay close attention to ways in which these investigations
matter‐‐well outside the confines of academic philosophy‐‐by looking at stubborn disputes within the social
sciences about what counts as “causal” or “explanatory”. 6 credits; HI; Fall; Ned Hall
PHIL 318 Buddhist Studies India Program: Buddhist Philosophy This course introduces students to major
trends in Buddhist philosophy as it developed in India from the time of the Buddha until the eleventh
century CE. The course emphasizes the relationships between philosophical reasoning and the meditation
practices encountered in the Buddhist Meditation Traditions course. With this in mind, the course is
organized into three units covering the Indian philosophical foundations for the Theravāda, Zen, and
Tibetan Vajrayāna traditions. While paying attention first and foremost to philosophical arguments and
their evolution, we also examine the ways in which metaphysics, epistemology and ethics inform one
another in each tradition. Prerequisite: Acceptance into the Buddhist Studies program. 7‐8 credits; NE, IS;
Fall; Arthur P McKeown
PHIL 319 Philosophy of Quantum Mechanics Quantum theories of matter are astonishingly successful—and
deeply mysterious. Niels Bohr is said to have remarked that “those who are not shocked when they first
come across quantum theory cannot possibly have understood it.” Richard Feynman said, “I think I can
safely say that nobody understands quantum mechanics.” Some quantum weirdness is unavoidable — it
appears, for instance, that wholes really are more than the sum of their parts and that nature is non‐local in
a surprising way. Other weirdnesses are features of some ways of understanding quantum mechanics but
not others: indeterminism, randomness, branching worlds, surprising connections between the physical
and the mental. We will look at some currently popular approaches: Bohm's deterministic theory,
spontaneous collapse theories, many‐worlds and many‐minds theories. Prerequisite: One Previous
Philosophy course or instructor consent. 6 credits; HI, QRE; Not offered 2022‐23
PHIL 320 Virtue Ethics What is a good human life? Who is a good person? Virtue ethicists think about these
questions in terms of two central ideas. Virtues, such as justice or courage, make us a certain type of person
(they give us a certain character). Wisdom (phronesis) enables good judgments about how to act in
particular situations. How should we think about the relationship between virtues and wisdom? How does
being wise differ from being (merely) intelligent or clever? These will be central questions for us to reflect
on as we read several core texts from the contemporary tradition of virtue ethics. We will also spend some
time on related concerns, such as what view of human nature, if any, is presupposed by virtue ethics, and
how we should understand the relationship between being virtuous and being happy. 6 credits; HI, WR2;
Not offered 2022‐23

309
PHIL 322 Social Construction The idea that various things are socially constructed is ubiquitous. But what
exactly does it mean for something to be socially constructed? And what things are socially constructed?
Race? Gender? Quarks? Mental Illness? Everything? We will read, among others, Sally Haslanger (Resisting
Reality), Ian Hacking (The Social Construction of What?), Nelson Goodman (Ways of Worldmaking) and Ásta
(Categories We Live By). Prerequisite: One previous course in Philosophy. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IDS; Not
offered 2022‐23
PHIL 373 Reptiles and Demons Skeptical arguments—like Descartes' malignant demon argument—threaten
to completely undermine our claim to have any knowledge of this world. Philosophers (and non‐
philosophers) have often met our apparent inability to answer these skeptical arguments with a shrug. The
skeptical scenarios exert no gravitational pull on most minds and can be safely filed under "philosophical
curiosities." Meanwhile, global conspiracy theories—like David Icke's theory that the world's governments
are overrun with shapeshifting reptilians from the constellation Draco—also threaten to undermine our
knowledge of the world. Trying to answer them runs us into the very same cognitive and epistemic
roadblocks that we run into with philosophical skepticism. We can't, however, meet these theories with a
shrug. Conspiracy theories—even the wilder ones—do attract adherents and do have real‐world (and
sometimes devastating) consequences. Intensifying our predicament is the undeniable fact that we live in a
world that is rife with conspiracies—some of them rather wild. In this seminar we will examine the
cognitive architecture and evidential conditions that contribute to our predicament and then ask whether
cognitive science or formal epistemology can offer any useful tools or strategies for confronting
philosophical skepticism and conspiracy theories. Prerequisite: A prior 200‐level course in philosophy. 6
credits; HI, WR2, QRE; Spring; Jason A Decker
PHIL 398 Comps Proposal This is the first part of the philosophy comps sequence. It is a five‐week
independent study to be enrolled in at the end of the Fall term Senior Year (or the year you will be
compsing). The purpose is to give you the chance to do more reading on your comps topics and to start
doing a bit of writing. By the last day of classes of Fall Term, you will turn in an official comps proposal
(approximately 1500 words). The proposal will (a) articulate the main philosophical problem or puzzle that
will be addressed in your comps; (b) describe some of the main moves that have been made in the relevant
literature; and (c) include a bibliography. 3 credits; S/CR/NC; NE; Fall; Anna Moltchanova
PHIL 399 Senior Thesis The planning, preparation, and completion of a philosophical paper under the
direction of a member of the department and as part of a seminar group. 6 credits; NE; Winter; Daniel M
Groll
PHIL 400 Integrative Exercise A colloquium in which seniors defend their senior theses and discuss the
senior theses of others. 3 credits; S/NC; Spring; Daniel M Groll

Physical Education, Athletics, and Recreation
The Physical Education Program includes a variety of activity courses from which the student may
select. Emphasis is on an "activity for all" approach in hopes that each person will discover that
physical activity can contribute to his/her well being now and in the future. Lifetime sports such as
swimming, racquetball, tennis, aerobics, badminton, golf, skiing (downhill and cross country), and
skating are particularly popular. To accommodate those who would prefer a team sport experience,
classes in volleyball, basketball, frisbee, and hockey are offered. Weight training, yoga and cycling
classes help those who wish to work on various components of their fitness. Classes are coed and
instruction is given at beginning, intermediate, and advanced levels.

310

Courses are provided for those seeking American Red Cross certification in First Aid and
CPR/AED and Lifeguarding.
Students interested in dance can elect to specialize in modern dance or ballet. Folk, social, and jazz
classes are also popular (see the Department of Theater and Dance elsewhere in the Catalog for
dance courses which may be taken for academic credit).
Requirements

A total of four terms of physical education credit are required for graduation. It is strongly
recommended that students complete this requirement by the end of their sophomore year. Classes
usually meet twice a week. Students choose their activity class from a large selection of courses
offered each term and may receive a maximum of one Physical Education activity credit per term.
Physical Education credit may be earned for participation in a varsity or club sport that meets the
requirements stipulated by the department. Varsity student-athletes may be granted one credit for
each varsity sport. For approved club sports, club students-athletes may be granted one credit per
academic year. Students may fulfill the required four PE credits for graduation by participating in
the same varsity or approved club sport.
Facilities

Classes and groups meet in the most ideal setting possible, making use of Cowling Gymnasium,
Recreation Center, West Gymnasium, Laird Stadium, Arb, Bell Field tennis courts, various outdoor
playing fields and several off-campus sites. Physical Education classes, varsity teams, clubs, and
intramurals are all tightly scheduled since the demands for use are very heavy.
Intercollegiate Athletics

Carleton sponsors intercollegiate varsity teams for both men and women in the following sports:
Basketball, Cross Country, Track and Field (indoor and outdoor), Soccer, Swimming/Diving, Golf
and Tennis.
Men only: Baseball, Football
Women only: Softball, Volleyball
Physical Education credit can be earned for participation on an intercollegiate team, one credit per
season of participation. Candidates for athletic teams must have a current physical examination
within six months of practice in their sport.
The College does not accept financial responsibility for medical, surgical, or other expenses
arising out of athletic injuries which exceeds the care provided through the College Health
Services and/or our authorized Athletic Trainer.
Carleton is a member of the Minnesota Intercollegiate Athletic Conference which participates in
Division III of the NCAA.

311

Intramural Sports
The primary goal of the Carleton Intramural Sports Program is to give Carleton students, faculty
and staff the opportunity to enjoy a good recreational athletics program. Such a program can
provide a balance of activities, further the social and athletic components of a Carleton student's
education and enhance the professional lives of faculty and staff. The program is designed to
encourage dorm-floor participation; athletic activities provides the opportunity to interact in a fun,
relaxing, healthy and cooperative environment. Similarly, faculty and staff participation is
encouraged. The intramural program is a great opportunity for all members of the college
community to interact in an extra-curricular environment.
Fall: 3 on 3 Basketball, Ultimate Frisbee, Tennis, Sand Volleyball, Dodgeball, Racquetball
Winter: Broomball, Indoor Soccer, 5x5 Basketball, Floor Hockey, Racquetball, Squash
Spring: Soccer, Ultimate Frisbee, Sand Volleyball, Tennis, Softball
Club Sports Student directed organizations allow interest groups to flourish in the following
activities:
Aikido, Alpine Ski, Badminton, Competitive Dance, Cycling, Equestrian, Ice Hockey, Karate,
Lacrosse, Nordic Ski, Rugby, Sailing, Table Tennis, Tae Kwon Do, Tennis, Ultimate Frisbee, Men's
Volleyball, Water Polo.
Activity Courses
All activity classes are offered on a S/NC basis.
PE 101 Aerobics Basic dance steps, calisthenic‐type movements and locomotor skills (running, jumping,
hopping, skipping, etc.) are combined into vigorous routines which are performed to the beat of popular
music. All classes offer components of strength development, flexibility and cardiovascular fitness. No
experience necessary. Wear comfortable clothes and shoes with good support (no running shoes). Fall,
Winter, Spring; Nancy Stuckmayer,
PE 102 Aikido, Intermediate Empty‐hand techniques are continued and weapon techniques are introduced.
More varieties of breakfalls are learned as the emphasis of the class shifts to higher‐level techniques.
Prerequisite: PE 103. Fall, Winter, Spring; Eric C Schlichting, Kristina N Syx, Aaron J Chaput,
PE 103 Aikido, Beginning Developed from samurai traditions, Aikido is Japanese budo‐‐a method of training
and study that applies the physical principles of a martial art toward the goals of peace, harmony, and self‐
improvement. The movements of Aikido focus on learning to move in harmony with another, yet can be an
effective self‐defense. Students also learn many ways of falling safely and getting up quickly. Applied
properly, the insights gained can lead to better self‐respect and more harmonious relationships. Fall,
Winter, Spring; Eric C Schlichting, Kristina N Syx, Aaron J Chaput,
PE 104 Aikido, Advanced More complex empty‐hand and weapon techniques are taught. Advanced
breakfalls are added along with more intense physical and mental training. Prerequisite: Beginning Aikido.
Fall, Winter, Spring; Eric C Schlichting, Kristina N Syx, Aaron J Chaput,

312
PE 105 Beginning Badminton/Pickleball This course will introduce students to both badminton and
pickleball, two sports that are quite similar in rules and method, but differ in equipment and some
strategies. Both sports focus on building skill development and fitness in a fun, relaxed atmosphere. The
goal of the course is to provide a great introduction to two potential lifetime sports. Fall, Winter, Spring;
Amy Erickson
PE 106 Badminton, Intermediate The objective of the course is to review basic skills and strategies of
badminton, in addition to learn new techniques and strategies of singles and doubles play with greater
emphasis on competition. Advanced singles and doubles strategies will be covered as well as involvement
in tournament play. Not offered 2022‐23
PE 107 Ballet I A beginning course in ballet technique, including basic positions, beginning patterns and
exercises. Students develop an awareness of the many ways their body can move, an appreciation of dance
as an artistic expression and a recognition of the dancer as an athlete. Fall, Winter, Spring; Jennifer Bader
PE 108 Ballet II For the student with previous ballet experience this course emphasizes articulation of the
technique and development of ballet vocabulary and movement theories. Opportunity to continue to work
on technique and to more finely tune the awareness of movement begun in Level I. Fall, Winter, Spring;
Jennifer Bader
PE 109 Ballet III This is an advanced class for students who have some capabilities and proficiency in ballet
technique. Content is sophisticated and demanding in its use of ballet vocabulary and musical phrasing.
Spring; Jennifer Bader
PE 110 Fundamentals of Baseball Fundamental skills of the game are introduced including throwing,
catching and hitting. Rules and strategies will be introduced but the focus will be on developing skills.
Students must provide their own baseball or softball gloves. Fall; Aaron D Rushing
PE 111 Basketball, Three on Three Open to all who enjoy basketball and have a basic understanding of the
game. Stress will be placed upon vigorous activity, though instruction will be given on basic rules, strategy
and skill improvement drills. This course offers an opportunity for a great workout in a co‐ed team setting.
Winter; Guy A Kalland
PE 115 Contemporary Dance Forms I This course provides an introduction to a variety of movement
approaches that develop an awareness of the body in space and moving through space. Students will learn
approaches designed to strengthen muscles, support joint mobility, find breath support, enhance
coordination, and encourage embodied learning. Fall; Alanna E Morris
PE 116 Contemporary Dance Forms II This course is intended for students seeking to refine and deepen
their awareness of embodied movement approaches. Through these approaches, students will work to
develop an alert and articulate body. In both standing and floor work, momentum, dynamic shifts and
spatial challenges are introduced. Winter; Rae Charles Harge
PE 117 Contemporary Dance Forms III This advanced course will continue to focus on a variety of embodied
movement approaches to refine the awareness of the moving body and prepare for the rigors of
performance and physical research. The aim will be on finding a personal connection to movement through
subtlety, speed and effort. Spring
PE 120 Diving, Springboard This class is an introduction to 1‐meter and 3‐meter springboard diving.
Students will first learn safety techniques for on the board, in the air, and while entering the water. They
will then learn board work hurdles and back presses, "in‐air" technique, and "entry" technique. At the end

313
of this course, students will be able to safely execute and perform jumps, dives, flips and/or twists off a
diving board and understand and appreciate diving as a participant and observer. Students should have
intermediate swimming skills so that they are safe and comfortable in the water. Not offered 2022‐23
PE 121 Fencing, Beginning An instructional class for beginners. Students learn footwork, techniques and
simple attacks and defense. Foils, masks and fencing jackets are provided. Not offered 2022‐23
PE 122 Introductory Aerobic Walking and Fitness This course will introduce students to safe, user friendly
walking and introductory fitness activities. With the winter weather as our guide, class sessions will include
socially distanced walking outdoors as well as remote indoor stretching, agility, mobility and light
strength training. Students will develop enjoyable exercise skills and habits that provide life‐long benefits
and do so in a friendly, mindful, and easy going class community. Not offered 2022‐23
PE 123 AfroFit In this class, we will be using modern hip‐hop Afrobeat music to get fit, celebrate Afro‐
Caribbean cultures, and have fun all at the same time through high‐intensity interval training (HIIT) dance.
Students should wear workout apparel that is comfortable for a free range of motion. Winter, Spring;
PE 124 Fitness for the Athlete For the off‐season or pre‐season competitor (IM, club, or varsity). The winter
term course will focus on those who want to stay in shape and hone their flexibility, balance, strength and
an aerobic threshold. This is a challenging course that will teach techniques and strategies to work out on
your own as well as motivate you to improve or work weaker areas. Incorporating training on the track,
free weights, bosu, plyometrics and much more. Spring; Jessica J Mueller
PE 125 Folk Dance Folk dance includes a variety of dances of varying intricacy from around the world. No
experience necessary. Fall, Winter, Spring;
PE 126 Hip‐hop/House Street Dance Class Students are familiarized with street dance vocabulary and
fundamentals. Emphasis on "finding your rhythm" through bodily awareness. Beginners can expect an
aerobic workout until their movement becomes looser and more efficient. Excellent for core strength,
balance and flexibility. The lessons are 70 minutes each and consist of a group warm‐up (ten minutes),
stretching (five minutes), hip‐hop vocabulary (fifteen minutes), house vocabulary (twenty‐five minutes),
and choreography (fifteen minutes). No experience necessary. Not offered 2022‐23
PE 127 Frisbee, Beginning Ultimate For the beginning or moderately experienced player who wants to
develop basic skills. See what all the fuss is about. If a golden retriever can do it, so can you! Fall;
PE 128 Frisbee, Advanced Ultimate Enhance your skills and abilities in Ultimate. Spring;
PE 129 Golf, Beginning Basic instruction and opportunities to improve your game are provided. All
equipment is provided. Experience not necessary. Spring; Tom W Journell
PE 130 Advanced Golf For students who have experience with the fundamentals of the swing and the game
and have also played (several times) on regulation golf courses. Each student must have (or have access to)
their own set of clubs. Prerequisite: Must be competent player, no beginners. Must have experience playing
regulation course and be able to complete 9 holes in under 2 hours. Fall, Spring; Ryan M Kershaw
PE 131 Ice Hockey This course is designed to give men and women the opportunity to play ice hockey
together in a fun and non‐competitive setting. Absolutely no body checking or rough play is allowed. Skill
development in skating, stick handling, passing and shooting is stressed as well as position play and rules
necessary to ensure the safety of the participants. Helmets are recommended and furnished. Students

314
must provide their own skates and hockey sticks. Highly accomplished or "hard‐core" hockey players have
no place in this class. Winter;
PE 133 Ice Skating, Beginning The class is divided into several ability groups with an instructor assigned to
each small group. Figure skating skills are presented in progressive order allowing individuals to move along
at their own pace. Classes meet outdoors on the Bald Spot rink. Students must provide their own figure
skates. Winter;
PE 134 Ice Skating, Intermediate Designed for students with previous skating experience, this course
develops skills with emphasis on edges, backward stroking, basic combinations, jumps and figures. Classes
meet outdoors on the Bald Spot rink. Students must provide their own figure skates. Winter;
PE 136 Studio Art Seminar in the South Pacific: Snorkeling/Diving and Hiking Snorkeling, scuba diving, and
hiking on this program can be counted toward the PE requirement. Approximately five to six required
snorkeling or diving days will be scheduled. Students will be assisted in obtaining snorkeling equipment.
Those who wish to scuba dive must obtain necessary certification and medical testing before departure, as
well as bear the cost of boat and tank rental and proper supervision. Prerequisite: Participation in Carleton
OCS program. Applicants should be comfortable in the water, possess basic swimming skills (snorkeling and
diving days will be scheduled), and be prepared for extended hiking in rugged terrain. S/CR/NC; Winter;
Eleanor M Jensen
PE 139 Outdoor Soccer Fundamental skills of outdoor soccer are introduced. Skills will be developed using
exercises, small‐sided games and other methods. Rules and strategy will be introduced and full‐sided games
will be incorporated into each session. There is an emphasis on teamwork and enjoyment of the game. Not
offered 2022‐23
PE 140 Introduction to Art & Science of Tai‐Chi This class embodies the four aspects of health, self‐defense,
meditation and philosophy. T’ai‐Chi helps the practitioner to create a relaxed state of awareness while
gently guiding and circulating the internal energy known as ch'i. T’ai‐Chi’s slow and relaxed movements,
combined with body awareness, deep breathing and energy work provide numerous health benefits such
as stress management/relief. Good posture, sleep habits, and energy maintenance will be emphasized to
supplement study habits and time management. The class curriculum includes gentle warm‐ups, standing
meditation, qi gong or breath work, Yang Style T’ai‐Chi movements, partner work, and an introduction to
the Sword. Spring; Ray W Hayward
PE 142 Karate An art of self‐defense which originated in Okinawa. Karate involves mastering techniques,
sharpening concentration and refining one's spirit. Karate develops self‐confidence and self‐discipline while
providing a solid workout. Ideally, the Karateka carries a clarity of concentration and serenity of spirit every
day in whatever she/he is doing. Beginners are welcome and appreciated. Fall, Winter, Spring; Aaron J
Chaput,
PE 145 Beginning Juggling Juggling is excellent for hand‐eye coordination, building grey matter in the brain,
and is closely related to math and music. In this course, we will introduce basic juggling props and styles. By
the end of the term we will have worked up from one ball to three‐ball tricks, passing, and games. Students
will leave the course with a new skill for life. Fall, Spring;
PE 146 Lifeguarding American Red Cross course that encompasses training in aquatic safety and rescue
skills. Upon successful completion of course, participants will receive two certifications: one for A.R.C.
Lifeguarding and the second for First Aid, AED/CPR; valid for two years. The course is approximately 35
hours in length, with 80% of time spent in pool and 20% in classroom. Required $50 textbook and pocket

315
mask fee will automatically be charged on tuition bill. Prerequisite: Student must demonstrate competence
in basic swim strokes (front crawl, breaststroke, and sidestroke), ability to tread water (without use of
hands/arms) for two minutes and ability to swim underwater. Spring; Andy M Clark
PE 147 Moving Anatomy This course seeks to provide an underlying awareness of body structure and
function. Using movement to expand knowledge of our anatomy will encourage participants to integrate
information with experience. Heightened body awareness and class studies are designed to activate the
general learning process. Spring
PE 148 Modern Dance I A physical exploration at the introductory level of the elements of dance: time,
motion, space, shape and energy. Students are challenged physically as they increase their bodily
awareness, balance, control, strength and flexibility and get a glimpse of the art of dance. Winter, Spring;
Daphne L McCoy
PE 149 Modern Dance II Builds upon the concepts and experiences in Level I with more emphasis on the
development of technique and expressive qualities as students are aided in a process of solving movement
problems and finding solutions. Movement combinations are more complex and physical demands are
challenging. Fall, Spring; Daphne L McCoy
PE 150 Contact Improvisation This is a course in techniques of spontaneous dancing shared by two or more
people through a common point of physical contact. Basic skills such as support, counterbalance, rolling,
falling and flying will be taught and developed in an environment of mutual creativity. Winter; Kristin Van
Loon, Arwen P Wilder
PE 151 Modern Dance III Continues to challenge the dance student with more intensive work on technical,
theoretical and expressive movement problems. Since students are more able and experienced, exploration
of unusual and intricate forms and movements is possible and the goal of each class is to go as deeply into
each idea as the limits of time and ability allow. Fall, Winter; Daphne L McCoy
PE 152 Lindy Hop, Beginning Provides in‐depth instruction in the Lindy Hop, a fun, energetic swing dance
that developed from the jazz music of the 1920s and 1930s. Emphasizes lead‐follow technique and social
dance moves while providing an understanding of the dance's roots. Previous social dance experience is
helpful but not required. Fall, Winter, Spring;
PE 153 Outdoor Skills‐Adventure This course will introduce students to many of the skills necessary to
survive and thrive in the wilderness. The objective of this course is to prepare students to plan and execute
their own backcountry experience with guidance in trip planning, plant and animal identification, first aid,
orienteering, shelter building, food planning, packing and preparation. The course couples hands on
outdoor experiential learning with in‐class lectures. First five weeks Spring; Aaron D Rushing, Nancy C
Braker
PE 154 Quidditch This course is an introduction to the game of Quidditch; originally created from the
fantastical world of Harry Potter. Quidditch in today's world is a mixed‐gender, contact sport. Skills from
basic to advanced will be introduced and refined through drills and scrimmages. No experience necessary,
just enthusiasm! Fall, Spring;
PE 155 Intermediate Juggling This course will cover more advanced juggling patterns, tricks, and
performance skills. By the end of the term, students will have learned multi‐person passing patterns, solo
tricks with balls and clubs, and developed juggling routines to music. Students who take this class will have

316
the skills and vocabulary to juggle with anyone in the broader community. Prerequisite: Beginning Juggling
or permission of Instructors. Spring;
PE 157 Beginning Bachata Bachata is a style of dance that originated in the Dominican Republic. The basics
of the dance is a three‐step movement; however, there are many variations in which we will learn. In
addition, this course will expose you to bachata music. This beginning Bachata class welcomes everyone at
any skill level, and is designed for anyone who wants to learn a Latin dance and/or improve their technique
and comfort with dance. In this course, we will cover the basics of Bachata, including basic steps and
partner techniques. By the end of this course, you will be able to perform basic bachata to a variety of
slow/fast bachata songs. Spring;
PE 158 Rock Climbing The beginning of the course covers climbing knots, belaying and commands. Efficient
movement and climbing styles will also be addressed. The majority of the term will allow students to apply
their new skills on the Recreation Center climbing wall and in the bouldering cave. Fall, Winter, Spring; Amy
Erickson
PE 159 Scuba PADI Open Water SCUBA certification can be earned. A SCUBA class involves three parts:
class, pool and open water. Classroom and pool sessions are conducted over six nights at the West Gym
classroom and Thorpe Pool. The open water portion (optional for PE activity credit but required for PADI
certification) is conducted off campus. Fall, Spring; John E Campion,
PE 161 Self Defense for Women Course consists of learning basic techniques (kicking, striking, blocking and
shifting moves), analyzing and decision making in a crisis, and the role body language, eye contact and
assertiveness can play in threatening and attack situations. There will be controlled practice drills with
partners. Fall, Spring; Mary Brandl,
PE 164 Physical Activity and Well Being: The Biopsychosocial Basis for Physical Activity This
discussion/activity course focuses on the scientific underpinnings for the practice of regular physical activity
to support holistic well‐being. The first 15 minutes of every class explores the biopsychosocial research on
regular physical activity, physical activity recommendations, and program design/implementation. The
remaining 45 minutes of every class is experiential and thus, is devoted to engaging in regular physical
activity. Winter; Tom W Journell
PE 167 Social Dance I This course provides instruction in basic steps, technique, and patterns of different
partner dances. It covers waltz, foxtrot, tango, cha‐cha, rumba, and East Coast swing. No prior dance
experience is assumed. Fall, Winter, Spring;
PE 168 Social Dance II This course expands on the dances taught in Social Dance I, as well as teaching more
challenging partner dances, such as hustle, samba, and nightclub 2‐step. The course will cover additional
technique and patterns in the dances from Social Dance I, and teach the basics, technique, and some
patterns in the new dances. Prerequisite: PE 167, Social 1 or instructor permission. Fall, Winter, Spring;
PE 169 Contemporary Experiments This class is a workshop in improvisation using the individual body as a
site/map for exploration. Through an embodied exploration of ancestral memory, tracing and thought to
increase physical range and capacity, we will engage movement within empathetic exchanges as a
collaborative process. Open to all movers. Fall
PE 170 Dance Improvisation In this course we will explore spontaneous moving, sourcing inspiration from
our senses, our environment, and each other. Students will work on creating movement, improvisationally,
and sharing that movement with each other. Open to all levels of experience. Fall; Rosy Simas

317
PE 171 Step Aerobics This class begins with a 5‐7 minute warm‐up and then moves toward a 20‐25 minute
straight aerobics routine. Then steps are incorporated into a 20‐25 minute aerobics workout. The remaining
class time ends with 5‐7 minutes of stretches in which one muscle group is chosen for special emphasis and
effort. Fall, Winter, Spring; Russ J Petricka
PE 172 Swimming, Fitness Designed for the accomplished swimmer who desires a vigorous workout as a
means of improving or maintaining cardiovascular fitness. Instruction covers stroke mechanics, drills, use of
training equipment and general workout design. Students must have the ability to swim front crawl,
backstroke, and breaststroke. Fall, Winter, Spring; Andy M Clark, Brooke L Plotz
PE 173 Swimming, Instructional Novice to intermediate swim. Introduction to basic swim skills and
technique. Fall, Winter, Spring; Brooke L Plotz
PE 174 Sport and Globalization in London and Seville: Introductory Coaching Activity As part of the
Introductory Coaching Practicum abroad, students will actively participate in soccer as well as other sport
exercises. Designed for students who may or may not have any previous playing or coaching experience,
this course will cover introductory methods of coaching and teaching young athletes. Specifically, students
will practice methods of teaching skills, structure, and strategies of team‐oriented sports. Not offered 2022‐
23
PE 175 West Coast Swing, Beginning This course is designed to introduce people to West Coast Swing and
give them the fundamentals to be able to appreciate and enjoy social dancing. It assumes no prior dance
knowledge. The course covers basics of partner dancing, individual and partnership technique, and a variety
of moves. At the end of the course, students should feel comfortable dancing West Coast Swing to a variety
of different styles of music and with different partners, and have gained an understanding of the ways to
communicate with their partner and express the music in their dancing. Fall, Winter, Spring;
PE 176 Intermediate West Coast Swing This course is for people who have already taken the Beginner West
Coast Swing class or have equivalent West Coast Swing experience and want to improve their technique
and comfort with the dance. It returns to the basics to add a layer of technique not covered in the beginner
class, then adds on new moves and styles of the dance. At the end of the course, students should be able to
perform advanced West Coast Swing moves with good technique and musicality. Spring
PE 177 Lindy Hop, Advanced Provides in‐depth instruction in the Lindy Hop, a fun, energetic swing dance
that developed from the jazz music of the 1920s and 1930s. Emphasizes lead‐follow technique and social
dance moves while providing an understanding of the dance's roots. Previous social dance experience is
helpful but not required. Prerequisite: Some Lindy Hop experience, equivalent to, but not necessarily, PE
152, Lindy Hop, Beginning. Spring;
PE 178 Tae Kwon Do This class on the traditional martial art of Korea meets in conjunction with the Tae
Kwon Do Club. Its goal is to strengthen the physical and mental abilities of its members. Tae Kwon Do offers
a well‐balanced practical approach to training, promoting physical fitness, self‐control, confidence,
leadership, discipline and an understanding of the art of Tae Kwon Do and Korean culture from which it
originated. The class is split based upon experience: beginners and intermediate students. The beginner
section requires no prior experience of TKD. Intermediate section will draw more upon the basics with
larger focus on sparring and demonstration techniques. Not offered 2022‐23
PE 187 Introduction to Trail Running This course is designed to introduce participants to trail running in the
Carleton Arboretum. Students will receive instruction in basic trail running techniques, training principles,

318
proper warmup and cool down approaches and injury prevention. Weekly run outside of class time
required. Class offered first six weeks of fall term. Fall; Tammy Metcalf‐Filzen
PE 188 Triathlon Training An excellent preparation for the "Carleton Triathlon" held at the end of May.
Students will learn how to effectively train in each of the three traditional sports of triathlon (swim, bike,
run). Instruction covers basic training principles, technique development, competitive preparation. This
course is open to all levels of experience from novice to advanced. Students must possess a minimal
amount of skill and conditioning in the three sports prior to enrollment. Spring; Andy M Clark
PE 190 Volleyball, Co‐ed Open to all experience levels. It provides an introduction to basic volleyball skills,
rules, and offensive/defensive strategies within a structure that provides both skill practice and scrimmage
opportunities. There is an emphasis on teamwork and social interaction. Fall, Winter, Spring; Jacki C Smith,
Abby Monson
PE 190 Volleyball, Co‐ed‐Intermediate This course expands beyond on the basic volleyball concepts taught
in Volleyball, Coed. It provides instruction on more advanced volleyball concepts and skills and is intended
for the intermediate level volleyball player. Skill specific and competitive play will be incorporated in all
classes. Winter; Abby Monson
PE 195 Weight Training and Conditioning The focus of this course is to assist students with developing a
complete conditioning program, including resistance training, running (speed and endurance), agility,
stretching (dynamic and static), proper nutrition and appropriate rest intervals. The instructor will assist
students in the proper application of specific exercises and drills to maximize effectiveness of their
conditioning program. Fall; Aaron D Rushing
PE 197 Yoga, Beginning This is an overview course in yoga, an integrated approach to health. This course
incorporates the practice of breathing techniques, hatha yoga postures (asanas), meditation, and
relaxation. Emphasis is on techniques to increase range of motion, strength and endurance, balance and
coordination. Appropriate for all levels. $5 required book fee will be automatically charged on tuition bill.
Fall; Michelle Moad,
PE 198 Yoga, Continuing This is a continuation and overview in yoga, an integrated approach to health. This
course incorporates the practice of breathing techniques, hatha yoga postures (asanas), meditation, and
relaxation. Emphasis is on techniques to increase range of motion, strength and endurance, balance and
coordination. Having a basic understanding of the poses, you will now begin to fine tune the postures and
deepen your practice. Appropriate for those with yoga experience. Fall, Winter, Spring; Michelle Moad,
PE 199 Yoga, Lifestyle This class is for all levels of yoga experience. This yoga lifestyle class will take your
yoga off the mat and into your daily life. A large part of the class will include discussions and practices for:
breathing exercises, guided relaxation techniques, meditation, physical asana (yoga poses) and discussion
on nutrition and sleep. Students will be asked to write a paragraph weekly about their home practice
experience. You will be building physical strength and stability, as well as awareness surrounding mental
and emotional ease. Please note, discussions will include practices utilized outside of class (which can be 5
minutes a day). This is an all levels class and beginners are welcome. Fall, Winter, Spring; Michelle Moad,
PE 205 Badminton Club An instructional and competitive opportunity to participate in the sport of
badminton. Learn and develop new skills, improve your fitness levels, and enjoy club camaraderie.
Prerequisite: Badminton Club Fall and Winter Term. Spring; Aaron J Chaput
PE 210 Baseball Intercollegiate, Men Spring; Aaron D Rushing

319
PE 211 Basketball Intercollegiate, Men Winter; Ryan M Kershaw
PE 212 Basketball Intercollegiate, Women Winter; Tammy Metcalf‐Filzen
PE 214 Competitive Dance Club Participants will practice techniques and moves for dances including: Waltz,
Quickstep, Cha Cha, Swing, as well as other styles. Dancers will learn techniques through a general
progression throughout practices. There will be sessions for newcomers, which will teach the basics of
dance. There will also be sessions for intermediate and advanced dancers, which will be taught by a
professional dance teacher and returning members. Winter; Aaron J Chaput
PE 217 Cross Country Intercollegiate, Men Fall; Dave H Ricks
PE 218 Cross Country Intercollegiate, Women Fall; Donna Ricks
PE 219 Cycling Club Spring; Aaron J Chaput
PE 226 Football Intercollegiate Fall; Tom W Journell
PE 227 Ultimate Frisbee Club, CUT and GOP Spring; Aaron J Chaput
PE 228 Ultimate Frisbee Club, Syzygy and Eclipse Spring; Aaron J Chaput
PE 229 Golf Intercollegiate, Men Fall;
PE 230 Golf Intercollegiate, Women Fall; Matthew J Stangl
PE 231 Ice Hockey Club, Men Winter; Aaron J Chaput
PE 232 Ice Hockey Club, Women Winter; Aaron J Chaput
PE 244 Lacrosse Club, Men Winter; Aaron J Chaput
PE 245 Lacrosse Club, Women Winter; Aaron J Chaput
PE 258 Rugby Club, Men Spring; Aaron J Chaput
PE 259 Rugby Club, Women Spring; Aaron J Chaput
PE 263 Nordic Ski Club Winter; Aaron J Chaput
PE 265 Alpine Ski Club Winter; Aaron J Chaput
PE 269 Soccer Intercollegiate, Men Fall; Bob S Carlson
PE 270 Soccer Intercollegiate, Women Fall; Jessica J Mueller
PE 271 Softball Intercollegiate, Women Spring; Amy Erickson
PE 272 Swimming/Diving Intercollegiate, Men Winter; Andy M Clark
PE 273 Swimming/Diving Intercollegiate, Women Winter; Andy M Clark
PE 282 Tennis Intercollegiate, Men Spring; Stephan G Zweifel
PE 283 Tennis Intercollegiate, Women Spring; Luciano H Battaglini
PE 284 Tennis Club Spring; Aaron J Chaput
PE 286 Track and Field/Indoor Intercollegiate, Men Winter; Dave H Ricks

320
PE 287 Track and Field/Indoor Intercollegiate, Women Winter; Donna Ricks
PE 288 Track and Field/Outdoor Intercollegiate, Men Spring; Dave H Ricks
PE 289 Track and Field/Outdoor Intercollegiate, Women Spring; Donna Ricks
PE 290 Sports and Globalization in London and Seville: Directed Reading and Volunteer Coaching Project
Prior to departure students will read selected works that highlight the sporting and cultural history of Great
Britain and Spain. Understanding of these readings will be evaluated through discussion and written work in
London and Seville. Students will also complete two short projects to prepare for observing, coaching, and
examining sport abroad. 2 credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐23
PE 290 Volleyball Club, Men Winter; Aaron J Chaput
PE 291 Volleyball Intercollegiate, Women Fall; Abby Monson
PE 293 Water Polo Club Spring; Aaron J Chaput
PE 316 Principles of Athletic Training Introduction to human anatomy as it pertains to athletic training and
prevention and care of athletic injuries. Consists of lecture, practical experiences, and use of rehabilitative
modalities. Requirement for athletic training student assistant. 2 credits; NE; Winter, Spring; Chad W
Alladin
PE 332 Foundations of Sport Psychology and Performance Mentality Research shows that the most
successful athletes are those who are able to think consciously and engage differently than others before,
during, and after competition. Like any other life skill, thinking differently and embracing active mindfulness
takes training, a willingness to learn, and dedicated hard work. This course is designed to help students and
athletes think differently about various aspects of training and competition, ultimately using these skills as
they apply to sport, functioning in team environments, and most importantly to the other areas of their
lives outside of athletics during and beyond their time at Carleton. 6 credits; NE; Spring; Jessica J Mueller
PE 338 Sports and Globalization in London and Seville: Global Athletics With their rich history and current
success, English and Spanish sport will serve as a framework to examine the emergence of contemporary
athletics and current issues facing participants, coaches, administrators, and spectators. The course will
explore the world of sport and specifically football (soccer) from a generalist perspective. London and
Seville will provide rich and unique opportunities to learn how sport and society intersect. With classroom
activities, site visits, field trips to matches, museums, and stadiums students will examine sport from an
historical and cultural perspective while keeping in mind how our globalized world impacts sport. Lastly, we
will seek to understand ways athletics can break down barriers and create understanding between others. 6
credits; NE, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
PE 340 Sports and Globalization in London and Seville: Introductory Coaching Practicum Designed for
students who may or may not have any previous playing or coaching experience, this course will cover
introductory methods of coaching and teaching young athletes. Specifically, students will practice methods
of teaching skills, structure, and strategies of team‐oriented sports. Emphasis will be placed on
understanding the coaching profession at different levels, developing coaching skills and creating a
philosophy of coaching in a cross‐cultural setting. 4 credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐23
PE 348 Contemporary Issues in Athletics An examination of athletics and their relationship to society. This
course focuses on the emergence of contemporary sport and the current issues facing participants,
coaches, administrators, and spectators. A special emphasis is placed on understanding the motivating

321
factors behind sport and developing a philosophy of sport that will help students evaluate current sporting
issues in society. 6 credits; SI; Fall; Luciano H Battaglini
PE 350 Methods: Principles and Philosophy of Coaching This course emphasizes the methods of teaching
skills, structure, and strategies of team oriented sports. Emphasis is placed on understanding the coaching
profession at different levels, developing coaching skills and creating a philosophy of coaching. 3 credits; SI;
Winter; Aaron D Rushing

Physics and Astronomy
Consonant with the liberal arts nature of Carleton, our department serves not only physics and
astronomy majors but also other science majors requiring a background in physics or astronomy,
and non-science majors desiring an introduction to these subjects. We have goals for the knowledge
we would like students to acquire, the skills they should master, and the experiences they should
have in learning and doing physics. For example, some of the general skills are the ability to
communicate clearly in written work and oral presentation; the ability to work collaboratively with
their peers; and the ability to continue learning on a largely independent basis. More specific skills
include logical problem-solving and mathematical analysis, experimental design and the use of
measurement apparatus, and the use of computers for modeling physical phenomena and for data
acquisition and analysis.
Requirements for the Physics Major
Prospective physics majors are strongly encouraged to begin their study of physics and mathematics
in the first year. Physics courses are somewhat sequential and are developed in close association
with mathematics courses. The curriculum provides an excellent basis for many post-Carleton
career paths, including teaching, medicine, working in industry, and graduate study in physics,
astronomy, and in various fields of engineering.
Most first-year students considering a major in physics will take either two 5-week courses (Physics
131 AND Physics 151) or one 10-week course (Physics 143 or Physics 144). Although taught from
slightly different perspectives, the two 5-week courses or the 10-week course will cover
fundamental topics in Newtonian mechanics and special relativity that prepare students for further
work in physics and related fields. We also offer a section of Physics 143 with problem solving that
is taught in the spring term. This section provides additional problem-solving instruction and is
appropriate for students who could benefit from additional support in the study of college-level
physics.
Required courses, 72 credits total
Introductory courses required are either:



PHYS 131 AND PHYS 151 (3 credits each)
PHYS 143 or PHYS 144 (6 credits each)

Other required Physics courses:


PHYS 228 or PHYS 226/227

322







PHYS 231
PHYS 235
PHYS 335
PHYS 342
PHYS 400
plus one applied physics course:

o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o

PHYS 234
PHYS 238
PHYS 341
PHYS 343
PHYS 344
PHYS 346
PHYS 347
PHYS 354
ASTR 232
ASTR 233
ENTS 262
GEOL 240
or others upon consultation with the department

Required mathematics courses:





MATH 101 or MATH 111
MATH 120
MATH 210 or MATH 211
MATH 232

Additional courses that are often recommended include Physics 123, 346, 356, Astronomy 113,
356, Chemistry 123, Mathematics 241, 261, 341, and Computer Science 111. Students considering
graduate school in physics are strongly encouraged to take Physics 346, 352, and 355.
Major Under Combined Plan in Engineering:
In addition to completing the requirements for the physics major listed above, the student should
also take the following courses required for admission to our partner institution, Washington
University: Mathematics 241, Chemistry 123, and Computer Science 111.
Physics Courses (PHYS)
PHYS 123 What Physicists Do A program of five lectures by invited speakers that is intended to give
students some perspective on the kinds of work done by people with a physics background. Visitors from
industry, government, business, and research and educational institutions will discuss their work and work‐
related experiences. The abstracts for the talks can be found at https://www.carleton.edu/physics‐
astronomy/phys‐123‐speaker‐series/. Prerequisite: Physics 131, 143, 144, 145, 151, 152, or 165. 1 credit;
S/CR/NC; NE; Spring; Arjendu K Pattanayak
PHYS 131 Introduction to Physics: Newtonian Mechanics and Lab A traditional introduction to classical
mechanics using the Newtonian worldview. The kinematics and dynamics of some simple systems are
investigated using Newton's laws, vector analysis, and the conservation laws of momentum and energy.

323
Comfort with algebra and the integration and differentiation of elementary functions is assumed. Weekly
laboratory work. Prerequisite: Mathematics 101 or 111, not open to students who have completed Physics
143, 144 or 145 at Carleton. 3 credits; LS, QRE; Fall; Evan A Rich, Valerie Fox
PHYS 143 Physical Systems: Mechanics and Relativity and Lab This course begins with an introduction to
classical mechanics using the Newtonian worldview. The kinematics and dynamics of some simple systems
are investigated using Newton's laws, vector analysis, and the conservation laws of momentum and energy.
The course moves beyond the Newtonian framework to address topics including special relativity and also
selected applications to atomic, nuclear, and particle physics. Comfort with algebra and the integration and
differentiation of elementary functions is assumed. Weekly laboratory work. Prerequisite: Previous
completion or concurrent registration in Mathematics 120 or 121. Not open to students who have
completed Physics 131, 144, 145 or 151 at Carleton. 6 credits; LS, QRE; Winter, Spring; Evan A Rich, Valerie
Fox
PHYS 144 Astrophysical Systems: Mechanics and Relativity and Lab This course begins by considering basic
principles of physics in the realm of planetary systems, black holes and dark matter in the universe.
Conservation of energy and momentum will be used to explore large‐scale phenomena in the cosmos. The
course moves beyond the Newtonian framework to address topics including special relativity and also
selected applications to atomic, nuclear, and particle physics. Comfort with algebra and the integration and
differentiation of elementary functions is assumed. Weekly laboratory work. Prerequisite: Previous
completion or concurrent registration in Mathematics 120 or 121. Not open to students who have
completed Physics 131, 143, 145 or 151 at Carleton. 6 credits; LS, QRE; Winter; Ryan C Terrien
PHYS 145 Mechanics and Waves and Lab This course begins with an introduction to classical mechanics
using the Newtonian worldview. The kinematics and dynamics of some simple systems are investigated
using Newton's laws, vector analysis, and the conservation laws of momentum and energy. The course
moves on to a study of the properties of fluids (both static and dynamic) and the principles of waves and
wave motion (including both sound and light). Comfort with algebra and the integration and differentiation
of elementary functions is assumed. Weekly laboratory work. Prerequisite: Mathematics 101 or 111. Not
open to students who have completed Physics 131, 143, or 144 at Carleton. 6 credits; LS, QRE; Spring; Jay D
Tasson
PHYS 151 Introduction to Physics: Relativity and Particles and Lab An introduction to principles of physics in
the domain of the very small and very fast. Topics include the special theory of relativity, and selected
applications to atomic, nuclear, and particle physics. Comfort with algebra and the integration and
differentiation of elementary functions is assumed. Weekly laboratory work. Prerequisite: Mathematics 120
or 121 (completion or concurrent registration) and Physics 131 (completion or concurrent registration). Not
open to students who have completed Physics 143 or 144 at Carleton. 3 credits; LS, QRE; Fall; Valerie Fox
PHYS 152 Introduction to Physics: Environmental Physics and Lab An introduction to principles of physics
and their application to the environment. Topics include energy and its flows, engines, energy efficiency,
energy usage and conservation in vehicles and buildings, the atmosphere, and climate change. Comfort
with algebra and the integration and differentiation of elementary functions is assumed. Weekly laboratory
work or field trips. Prerequisite: Mathematics 101, 111 (completion or concurrent registration) and Physics
131 (completion or concurrent registration), 143, 144 or 145. 3 credits; LS, QRE; Fall; Evan A Rich
PHYS 165 Introduction to Electricity, Magnetism, and Optics and Lab A study of the principles of electricity,
magnetism, and optics with an emphasis on real‐world applications including electronics, laser physics,
astronomy, and medicine. Topics include electric and magnetic fields, electric potentials, DC and AC circuits,

324
geometric and wave optics, and relevant properties of matter. Designed for science majors who want
additional background in physics. Comfort with algebra and the integration and differentiation of
elementary functions is assumed. One laboratory per week. Prerequisite: Physics 131, 143, 144, or 145.
Mathematics 120 or 121 suggested. 6 credits; LS, QRE; Winter; Melissa Eblen‐Zayas, Valerie Fox
PHYS 226 Atomic and Nuclear Physics Theory An elementary but analytical introduction to the physics of
atoms and nuclei. Topics include the particle aspects of electromagnetic radiation, an introduction to
quantum mechanics, the wave aspects of material particles, and applications of these concepts to atomic,
nuclear, and particle physics. This course covers the theory portion of PHYS228 without the lab component
that will be a separate course, allowing students to proceed through theory courses in the physics major.
Prerequisite: Physics 143, 144 or 151. 4 credits; NE, QRE; Not offered 2022‐23
PHYS 227 Atomic and Nuclear Physics Lab This lab course covers applications of quantum mechanics to X‐
ray and optical spectra and instruments of nuclear and particle physics. The course meets for one
laboratory session per week and covers the lab portion of Physics 228 that is required for upper‐level
physics lab classes. Prerequisite: Physics 143, 144 or 151; Physics 226. 2 credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐23
PHYS 228 Atomic and Nuclear Physics and Lab An elementary but analytical introduction to the physics of
atoms and nuclei. Topics include the particle aspects of electromagnetic radiation, an introduction to
quantum mechanics, the wave aspects of material particles, the structure of atoms, X‐ray and optical
spectra, instruments of nuclear and particle physics, nuclear structure and elementary particles. One
laboratory per week. Prerequisite: Physics 143, 144 or 151. 6 credits; LS, QRE; Fall; Jay D Tasson, Marty
Baylor
PHYS 231 Analytical and Computational Mechanics An analytical and computational treatment of classical
mechanics using Lagrangian and Hamiltonian formalisms. A variety of systems, including some whose
equations of motion cannot be solved analytically, will be explored. Possible examples include harmonic
oscillators, central‐force problems, chaotic dynamics, astrophysical systems, and medieval siege engines.
Prerequisite: Physics 131, 143 or 144 and Mathematics 210 or 211 or instructor permission. 6 credits; NE,
QRE; Winter; Arjendu K Pattanayak
PHYS 232 Astrophysics I A study of stellar structure and evolution with an emphasis on the physical
principles underlying the observed phenomena. Topics include the birth, evolution, and death of stars,
pulsars, black holes, and white dwarfs. Prerequisite: Physics 226, 228 or 231. 6 credits; NE, QRE; Not offered
2022‐23
PHYS 233 Astrophysics II A study of galactic and extragalactic astronomy with an emphasis on the physical
principles underlying the observed phenomena. Topics include the structure and dynamics of the Milky
Way Galaxy and other galaxies, the interstellar medium, quasars and active galaxies, clusters and
superclusters, and cosmology. Prerequisite: Physics 228 or 231. 6 credits; QRE, NE; Spring; Cindy A Blaha
PHYS 234 Computer Simulations in Complex Physical Systems The development of techniques to study
complex physical systems from a probabilistic and numerical standpoint using Mathematica. Subject
material is applicable to all the sciences and mathematics. Some topics considered are random walks,
percolation clusters, avalanches, traffic flow, the spread of forest fires and diseases, and a brief
introduction to Bayesian statistics. No Mathematica skills are assumed. Prerequisite: Physics 131, 143, or
144, or instructor permission. 6 credits; LS, QRE; Not offered 2022‐23
PHYS 235 Electricity and Magnetism and Lab Electric and magnetic fields in free space, and their
interactions with charges and currents. Topics include DC and AC circuits, Maxwell's equations, and

325
electromagnetic waves. Weekly laboratory work. Prerequisite: Physics 165, 226, 228 or Physics 231;
Mathematics 210 or Mathematics 211; or instructor permission. 6 credits; LS, QRE; Spring; Evan A Rich
PHYS 238 Physics of Soft Matter An introduction to topics in the interdisciplinary field of soft matter‐‐
materials which fall in the liminal space between solids and liquids‐‐studied using a physics perspective.
Possible topics include colloids, polymers, viscoelasticity, liquid crystals, biological and natural materials,
self‐assembly, and surface forces. Prerequisite: Physics 131, 143, 144 or 145. 6 credits; NE; Not offered
2022‐23
PHYS 251 Theory and Applications of Remote Sensing Remote sensing – interpreting information about
physical systems at a distance using the electromagnetic spectrum – enables scientists to monitor climate
change, detect material resources, track urban develoment, or map the surface of other planets, among a
host of other applications. This course will explore key satellite remote sensing methods, such as visible and
thermal imagery, visible through mid‐infrared spectroscopy, radar, gamma ray and neutron spectroscopy,
and laser altimetry, introducing both the physical theory and practical data analysis techniques.
Prerequisite: 100‐level PHYS (151, 152, 143, 144, 145, 165), Astronomy 110, ENTS 120, or Geology 110.
Math 120 or 121 also required. 6 credits; NE, QRE; Winter; Valerie Fox
PHYS 297 Assessment and Communication of External Physics Activity An independent study course
intended for students who have completed an external activity related to the physics major (for example,
an internship or an externship) to communicate (both in written and oral forms) and assess their physics
learning from that activity. Prerequisite: Permission of department chair and homework in advance of the
external physics activity. 1 credit; NE; Not offered 2022‐23
PHYS 311 Nonlinear Optoelectronic Dynamics The course will start from basic electromagnetism and model
the dynamics of laser light interfering via modulated optoelectronics, including feedback with time‐delays.
Techniques from non‐linear time‐series data analysis will be used to characterize the various different kinds
of dynamics. Basic concepts of information theory, network dynamics, and machine learning based on
reservoir computing will be introduced. There will be significant hands‐on work, with an exploration of
applications to signal processing, optical communication, and random number generation. Prerequisite:
Physics 228 and 235. 6 credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐23
PHYS 333 Survey of Particle and Nuclear Physics A detailed survey of selected topics in particle and nuclear
physics. Particle physics topics might include the Standard Model interactions and mediators, Feynman
diagrams , symmetries and tests of conservation laws, Dirac equation and possibly QED Feynman rules.
Nuclear physics topics might include the Liquid Drop, Fermi Gas, and Shell models of the nucleus, discussion
of radiation, energy deposition in media, and discussion of quantum chromodynamics. Fluency in multi‐
variable calculus is expected. Prerequisite: Physics 228 and Physics 235. Math 232 recommended. 6 credits;
NE; Not offered 2022‐23
PHYS 335 Quantum Mechanics An examination of the structure of non‐relativistic quantum mechanics and
how this theory differs from those of classical physics. Topics include the mathematics of Hilbert space, the
postulates of quantum mechanics, the motion of a particle in one dimension (including the free particle and
the simple harmonic oscillator), the Heisenberg uncertainty principle, and spin. Multidimensional
applications will include the harmonic oscillator, the hydrogen atom. Approximation techniques and
applications will be presented. Prerequisite: Physics 226 or 228, and Physics 231 and Mathematics 232.
Familiarity with matrix algebra is assumed. 6 credits; NE; Winter; Jay D Tasson
PHYS 341 Waves The analysis of wave phenomena, including normal mode expansions, the wave equation
and boundary value problems, and interference, diffraction, and polarization. Applications are made to

326
mechanical, sound, water and electromagnetic waves with particular emphasis on electromagnetism and
optics. Prerequisite: Physics 231 and 235, and Mathematics 232. 6 credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐23
PHYS 342 Contemporary Experimental Physics and Lab A study of experimental techniques and apparatus
basic to the measurements which underlie and validate contemporary theories in physics. Topics include
electrical measurements, data analysis and statistics, optical and laser techniques, particle detectors, and
time coincidence techniques. Applications are made to experiments such as magnetic resonance,
Mossbauer and nuclear spectroscopy and laser optics. Class time is devoted to studying the measurement
techniques and considering phenomenological models of the effects observed in the laboratory. One
laboratory per week. Prerequisite: (Physics 227 or 228) and 235 and (Physics 335 or Physic 346) or
instructor permission. 6 credits; LS, QRE; Spring; Melissa Eblen‐Zayas, Marty Baylor
PHYS 343 Electronics and Lab A study of the electrical circuits and electronics underlying modern physics
instrumentation. Includes an introduction to microprocessor and microcomputer design. Approximately
equal emphasis on analog and digital electronics. One laboratory per week. Prerequisite: Physics 235. 6
credits; LS, QRE; Not offered 2022‐23
PHYS 344 Classical and Quantum Optics A junior/senior level course in classical and quantum optics.
Includes the phenomena of interference, diffraction and coherence and quantum optical applications, such
as unique statistical states of light or the operation of a laser. Modern applications of these areas are
studied through such topics as fiber optics telecommunication, optical data storage, or manipulation of
atoms by light. Prerequisite: Physics 235 and Mathematics 232. 6 credits; NE; Fall; Marty Baylor
PHYS 345 Advanced Optics This is a laboratory course that will serve as a follow‐up to Physics 344, Classical
and Quantum Optics. Students will conduct a number of experiments pertaining to optical phenomena. The
experiments will display effects pertaining to classical, quantum, and non‐linear optics. The lab will take
place once a week for four hours each session. Prerequisite: Corequisite Physics 344 or permission of the
instructor. 2 credits; QRE, LS; Fall; Marty Baylor
PHYS 346 Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics The fundamentals of classical thermodynamics and
statistical mechanics. Topics include the laws of thermodynamics; heat engines and refrigerators; the
Maxwell‐Boltzmann distribution; the various canonical distributions; the statistical concepts of temperature
and entropy; Fermi‐Dirac, and Bose‐Einstein distributions with applications to black‐body radiation,
phonons, and electrons in solids; the Ising model; and an introduction to critical phenomena. Prerequisite:
Physics 226 or 228. 6 credits; NE; Fall; Arjendu K Pattanayak
PHYS 347 General Relativity Einstein's theory of general relativity is developed from basic physical
principles. Also presented is the mathematics of curved space time. Astrophysical applications of general
relativity, including spherically symmetric objects, black holes, cosmology and the creation and detection of
gravitational waves are given. Prerequisite: Physics 235 and Physic 231. 6 credits; NE; Winter; Jay D Tasson
PHYS 352 Advanced Electricity and Magnetism The classical theory of fields and waves. Electromagnetic
theory including Maxwell's equations, radiation and relativity. Prerequisite: Physics 235, Mathematics 341
strongly recommended. 6 credits; NE; Spring; Arjendu K Pattanayak
PHYS 354 Solid State Physics An introduction to the physics of solids. Particular attention is paid to the
properties exhibited by atoms and molecules because of their association and regular periodic arrangement
in crystals. Topics include crystal structure and diffraction, the reciprocal lattice, phonons and lattice
vibrations, thermal properties, free‐electron theory and band structure. Prerequisite: Physics 335 or 346. 6
credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐23

327
PHYS 355 Topics in Advanced Classical Mechanics Lagrangian and Hamiltonian methods including central
force motion, coupled harmonic oscillators, and the study of continuous systems. Additional subjects may
include fluid dynamics, classical field theory or other specialized topics. Prerequisite: Physics 231. 6 credits;
NE, QRE; Not offered 2022‐23
PHYS 356 Special Project Individual projects in experimental, theoretical, or computational physics.
Available projects are often related to faculty research interests or to the development of course‐support
materials, such as new laboratory exercises. Prerequisite: Permission of the instructor. 2‐3 credits; S/CR/NC;
NE; Fall; Helen K Minsky
PHYS 400 Integrative Exercise An extensive study of a specific topic in physics, culminating in a 60‐minute
presentation during winter or spring term and a 7500 word paper. Students may arrange to complete the
bulk of their work during winter or spring term (Physics 400, 6 credits), or divide their effort between terms
(Physics 400, winter, 3 credits; Physics 400, spring, 3 credits). 3‐6 credits; S/NC; Summer, Winter, Spring;
Marty Baylor, Cindy A Blaha, Barry N Costanzi, Ryan C Terrien, Melissa Eblen‐Zayas, Arjendu K Pattanayak,
Jay D Tasson, Helen K Minsky

Astronomy Courses
ASTR 110 Introduction to Astronomy An introduction to current astronomy with an emphasis on how we
know what we know. Topics include the solar system; the life cycles of stars; pulsars, quasars, and black
holes; and the history and future fate of the universe. No mathematics background beyond high school
algebra and trigonometry is assumed. 6 credits; QRE, LS; Fall, Winter; Ryan C Terrien, Cindy A Blaha
ASTR 113 Observational and Laboratory Astronomy Theory and practice of basic techniques in
observational and laboratory astronomy. Certain problems involve the use of the 16‐inch and 8‐inch
telescopes. Prerequisite: Astronomy 100, 110, 127, 232, 233, Physics 226, 228, 232, 233 or instructor
permission. 3 credits; S/CR/NC; LS, QRE; Fall, Spring; Valerie Fox
ASTR 232 Astrophysics I A study of stellar structure and evolution with an emphasis on the physical
principles underlying the observed phenomena. Topics include the birth, evolution, and death of stars,
pulsars, black holes, and white dwarfs. Prerequisite: Physics 226, 228, 231 or instructor permission. 6
credits; NE, QRE; Not offered 2022‐23
ASTR 233 Astrophysics II A study of galactic and extragalactic astronomy with an emphasis on the physical
principles underlying the observed phenomena. Topics include the structure and dynamics of the Milky
Way Galaxy and other galaxies, the interstellar medium, quasars and active galaxies, clusters and
superclusters, and cosmology. Prerequisite: Physics 228 or 231 or instructor permission. 6 credits; NE, QRE;
Spring; Cindy A Blaha
ASTR 356 Special Project Individual projects in observational, theoretical, or computational astronomy.
Available projects are often related to faculty research interests or to the development of course‐support
materials, such as new laboratory exercises. Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 2‐3 credits; NE; Not offered
2022‐23

Political Science and International Relations
Political Scientists study dynamics of norms and power that structure collective action and
coercion. Study of political science encompasses governments, private and public organizations,

328

political behavior, public policies, political processes, systems, and theory. It includes international
relations, world politics, comparative politics including American Politics, political philosophy, and
local-global environmental politics. The department's curriculum is designed to cultivate active and
productive citizenship, as well as provide versatile skills and knowledge. These can be applied to a
wide range of fields, including law, business, government, international service, education,
journalism, and other fields.
Requirements for the Political Science and International Relations major
Seventy-five credits, including:
1. Core Courses (18 credits):
Majors must complete three of the following core courses preferably prior to their senior year.
These courses cannot be substituted with any other courses at Carleton or elsewhere:





POSC 120 Democracy and Dictatorship
POSC 122 Politics in America: Liberty and Equality
POSC 160 Political Philosophy
POSC 170 International Relations and World Politics

2. Methods Sequence (15 credits):
a. One course (6 credits) of introductory statistics or equivalent preparation, including:







STAT 120 Introduction to Statistics∙
STAT 230 Applied Regression Analysis∙
STAT 250 Introduction to Statistical Inference∙
PSYC 200/201 Measurement and Data Analysis
SOAN 239 Social Statistics∙
Or AP Statistics score of 4 or 5 (see below)

The introductory statistics course (or equivalent) may be taken on an S/CR/NC basis. Other courses
may be accepted for this requirement with the approval of the chair. Students who use AP Statistics
score of 4 or 5 for the placement must take an additional elective in the department (i.e., 42 elective
credits, not 36) to meet the required 75 credits for the major. It is recommended, but not required, to
replace that 6 credits with POSC 232 when available. Otherwise, choose one 6 credit elective course
from the list of approved elective courses.
b. POSC 230 Methods of Political Research (6 credits). This course should be taken as soon as
possible after declaring a major, but not simultaneously with the stats class listed above. This course
cannot be substituted with any other method course at Carleton or elsewhere.
c. POSC 232 Methods (3 credits) from a list of courses offered in the department. Methods courses
of 3 credits or more in other departments may be substituted with prior approval from the chair.



POSC 222 Political Science Lab: Interviewing Techniques (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 232 Political Science Lab Focus Group Analysis

329

3. Elective Courses (36 credits):






At least two courses (12 credits) must be at the 300‐level. The department recommends that
majors take at least one seminar course during the junior year.
Students may count the fourth 100‐level core course (6 credits) as one of their electives.
A maximum of 12 credits earned outside of the department may be applied towards the total
number of electives. These non‐department credits may consist of: (a) approved courses in other
Carleton departments; (b) from non‐Carleton OCS programs; or (c) from non‐Carleton post‐
matriculation courses. Non‐departmental courses may not be used to replace 300‐level seminars,
and should be distinct and independent from courses offered by the department. Application of
non‐Carleton OCS courses and other post‐matriculation courses require approval from the chair.
The chair may require a copy of the course syllabus for off‐campus and other post‐matriculation
courses.
Students may count up to six credits of POSC 300 Collaborative Research course as elective credit.
Those credits must be taken on a graded basis. Students may take additional POSC 300 credits
without those credits counting as electives in the major. This POSC 300 course is not a regular
course and offered by individual faculty members at their discretion.

Elective Courses:



























POSC 122 Politics in America: Liberty and Equality
POSC 201 Statecraft and the Tools of National Power
POSC 202 Tools of National Power: Statecraft and Diplomatic Power (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 203 Political Communication: Political Advertising in Elections and Public Policy (not offered in
2022‐23)
POSC 204 How American Campaigns and Elections Work (and Don’t Work)
POSC 205 News Media and Democratic Electoral Processes (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 206 Tools of National Power: Statecraft and Economic Power (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 209 Money and Politics (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 210 Misinformation, Political Rumors, and Conspiracy Theories
POSC 213 Psychology of Mass Political Behavior (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 214 Visual Representations of Political Thought and Action
POSC 215 Comparative Political Communication: News Coverage of Elections
POSC 216 Politics in the Post‐Truth Society (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 217 Monuments, Museums & Meaning: How Politics Shapes Memory in Artifacts (not offered
in 2022‐23)
POSC 218 Schools, Scholarship and Policy in the United States (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 220 Politics and Political History in Film (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 221 Latin American Politics (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 222 Political Science Lab: Interviewing Techniques (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 223 Political Science Lab: Content Analysis (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 227 Contemporary Capitalisms
POSC 229 The U.S. Congress: Coordination and Conflict (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 231 American Foreign Policy (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 235 The Endless War on Terror
POSC 236 Global, National and Human Security (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 238 Sport & Globalization London/Seville Pgm: Globalization and Development: Lessons from
Int'l Football (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 240 At the Corner of Broadway and Main Street: The Contrasting Politics of Northfield and
the Twin Cities

330













































POSC 242 Middle East Politics (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 244 The Politics of Eurovision
POSC 247 Comparative Nationalism (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 249 From the International to the Global: Critical Theories of World Politics
POSC 250 Kings, Tyrants, Philosophers: Plato's Republic (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 251 Modern Political Philosophy: Liberalism and Its Critics
POSC 252 Free Expression: the Good, the Bad, and the Ugly (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 253 Welfare Capitalisms in Post‐War Europe
POSC 254 Freedom, Excellence, Happiness: Aristotle's Ethics (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 255 Post‐Modern Political Thought (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 256 Nietzsche: Beyond Good and Evil (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 257 Marxist Political Thought
POSC 258 Politics and Ambition
POSC 261 The Global Crisis of Democracy
POSC 262 Displaced Lives: Freedom and Meaning (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 263 Revolutions in the Age of Internet
POSC 264 Politics of Contemporary China
POSC 265 Public Policy and Global Capitalism
POSC 266 Urban Political Economy (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 268 Global Environmental Politics and Policy
POSC 269 I Did My Own Research: Information and Political Division in America (not offered in
2022‐23)
POSC 271 Constitutional Law I
POSC 272 Constitutional Law II
POSC 273 Race and Politics in the U.S.
POSC 274 Globalization, Pandemics, and Human Security (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 276 Imagination in Politics: Resisting Totalitarianism
POSC 277 Religion in Politics: Conflict or Dialogue? (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 278 Memory and Politics (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 279 Global Challenges and Civil Society Solutions
POSC 282 Terrorism and Counterterrorism
POSC 283 Separatist Movements
POSC 284 War and Peace in Northern Ireland
POSC 285 The U.S. Intelligence Community
POSC 288 Politics & Pub Policy in Washington DC Program: Politics and Public Policy in Washington
DC (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 294 Central and Eastern European Politics Program: Perceptions of Otherness in Modern
Eastern and Central Europe
POSC 295 Central and Eastern European Politics Program: Nation‐Building in Central and Eastern
Europe between Politics and Art
POSC 296 Central and Eastern European Politics Program: Challenges to the Nation‐State in Eastern
and Central Europe: Immigrants and Minorities
POSC 302 Subordinated Politics and Intergroup Relations*
POSC 303 Political Communication: Political Advertising in Elections and Public Policy* (not offered
in 2022‐23)
POSC 305 News Media and Democratic Electoral Processes* (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 306 Identity Politics and Group Behavior in America*
POSC 307 Go Our Own Way: Autonomy in the U.S. Civil Rights Movement* (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 308 Global Gender Politics*
POSC 313 Legal Issues in Higher Education

331




















POSC 315 Polarization, Parties, and Power* (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 323 Revolutionary Latin America (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 324 Rebels and Risk Takers: Women and War in the Middle East* (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 328 Foreign Policy Analysis*
POSC 329 Reinventing Humanism: A Dialogue with Tzvetan Todorov (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 330 The Complexity of Politics* (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 333 Global Social Changes and Sustainability* (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 336 Global Populist Politics* (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 339 LGBTQ Politics in America (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 348 Strangers, Foreigners and Exiles*
POSC 352 Political Theory of Alexis de Tocqueville* (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 355 Identity, Culture and Rights* (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 358 Comparative Social Movements*
POSC 359 Cosmopolitanism (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 361 Approaches to Development*
POSC 366 Urban Political Economy* (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 367 Social Welfare in a Time of Crisis* (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 372 Mansions and Shantytowns: Politics of the Spaces We Live In*
POSC 380 Political Economy of China and Zomia* (not offered in 2022‐23)



AMST 396 Commodifying and Policing: Globalization of the American Suburb and City (not offered
in 2022‐23)
ARBC 144 Arabic Literature at War (not offered in 2022‐23)
CAMS 296 Cinema and Cultural Change in Chile and Argentina (not offered in 2022‐23)
ECON 240 Microeconomics of Development
ECON 241 Growth and Development
ECON 257 Economics of Gender
ECON 264 Health Care Economics
ECON 268 Economics of Cost Benefit Analysis (not offered in 2022‐23)
ECON 270 Economics of the Public Sector
ECON 271 Economics of Natural Resources and the Environment
ECON 274 Labor Economics (not offered in 2022‐23)
ECON 275 Law and Economics
ECON 277 History and Theory of Financial Crises (not offered in 2022‐23)
ECON 280 International Trade
ECON 281 International Finance
ENTS 210 Environmental Justice
ENTS 310 Topics in Environmental Law and Policy (not offered in 2022‐23)
EUST 100 Allies or Enemies? America through European Eyes
EUST 110 The Nation State in Europe (not offered in 2022‐23)
EUST 159 "The Age of Isms" ‐ Ideals, Ideas and Ideologies in Modern Europe
EUST 249 The European Union from Constitution to Crisis (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 123 U.S. Women's History Since 1877 (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 138 Crusades, Mission, and the Expansion of Europe (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 139 Foundations of Modern Europe (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 141 Europe in the Twentieth Century (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 150 Politics of Art in Early Imperial China
HIST 151 History of Modern Japan
HIST 153 History of Modern China (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 156 History of Modern Korea (not offered in 2022‐23)






























332





































HIST 161 From Mughals to Mahatma Gandhi: An Introduction to Modern Indian History
HIST 165 From Young Turks to Arab Revolutions: A Cultural History of the Modern Middle East (not
offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 170 Modern Latin America 1810‐Present (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 181 West Africa in the Era of the Slave Trade (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 183 History of Early West Africa (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 184 Colonial West Africa (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 205 American Environmental History
HIST 212 The Era of the American Revolution
HIST 226 U.S. Consumer Culture
HIST 240 Tsars and Serfs, Cossacks and Revolutionaries: The Empire that was Russia (not offered in
2022‐23)
HIST 241 Russia through Wars and Revolutions
HIST 242 Communism, Cold War, Collapse: Russia Since Stalin (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 244 The Enlightenment and Its Legacies (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 245 Ireland: Land, Conflict and Memory (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 250 Modern Germany
HIST 257 Chinese Capitalism: From Local to Global
HIST 260 The Making of the Modern Middle East (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 263 Plagues of Empire
HIST 265 Central Asia in the Modern Age
HIST 266 History of Islam in South Asia (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 270 Nuclear Nations: India and Pakistan as Rival Siblings
HIST 281 War in Modern Africa (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 341 The Russian Revolution and its Global Legacies (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 346 The Holocaust
HIST 347 The Global Cold War (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 360 Muslims and Modernity
HIST 383 Africa's Colonial Legacies (not offered in 2022‐23)
LTAM 300 Issues in Latin American Studies
PHIL 113 The Individual and the Political Community (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 152 Religions in Japanese Culture
SOAN 225 Social Movements (not offered in 2022‐23)
SOAN 256 Africa: Representation and Conflict
SOAN 257 Culture and Politics in India (not offered in 2022‐23)
SOAN 288 Diversity, Democracy, Inequality in America (not offered in 2022‐23)
SOAN 323 Mother Earth: Women, Development and the Environment (not offered in 2022‐23)
SOAN 353 Ethnography of Latin America (not offered in 2022‐23)

4. POSC 400 - Integrative Exercise (6 credits):
During their senior year, students will revise substantially the final paper from an advanced
seminar in Political Science.
5. Study Abroad
A maximum of 12 credits earned on a non-Carleton and non-departmental within Carleton off
campus studies program may be granted toward the electives requirement. These credits may not be
used to replace a core course and should be distinct and independent from electives offered at
Carleton. The chair may require a copy of the off-campus course syllabus.

333

Political Science and International Relations Courses
POSC 100 Political Culture and Political Communication From political actions taken by leaders, citizens,
cross‐border workers, and inhabitants during the pandemic to news coverage of political campaigns, global
communication networks have transformed politics and challenged personal as well as political
communication. This seminar examines news coverage of events in the comparative contexts of US, UK,
and EU politics as well as the challenges we face in personal communication in cross– and trans‐cultural
communication in global and local political and social spaces. 6 credits; AI, WR1, QRE, IS; Fall; Barbara Allen
POSC 100 Science and Humanity The modern age has been characterized by the unprecedented advance of
natural science and the attempt to achieve technological mastery of nature. How did this come about?
What worldview does it express, and how does that worldview affect the way we live and think? We will
investigate these questions by studying classic works by some of modernity's philosophic founders
(including Francis Bacon, René Descartes, and Thomas Hobbes) and some of its most penetrating
interpreters and critics (including Jonathan Swift and Friedrich Nietzsche). 6 credits; AI, WR1, IS; Fall;
Laurence D Cooper
POSC 120 Democracy and Dictatorship An introduction to the array of different democratic and
authoritarian political institutions in both developing and developed countries. We will also explore key
issues in contemporary politics in countries around the world, such as nationalism and independence
movements, revolution, regime change, state‐making, and social movements. 6 credits; SI, IS, WR2; Fall,
Winter, Spring; Huan Gao, Juan Diego Prieto
POSC 122 Politics in America: Liberty and Equality An introduction to American government and politics.
Focus on the Congress, Presidency, political parties and interest groups, the courts and the Constitution.
Particular attention will be given to the public policy debates that divide liberals and conservatives and how
these divisions are rooted in American political culture. 6 credits; SI, IDS, QRE, WR2; Fall, Winter, Spring;
Christina E Farhart, Brian F Harrison
POSC 150 The Political Thought of Malcolm X and Martin Luther King, Jr. & the American Civil Rights
Movement What justifies self‐defense and retaliation in defending civil rights and liberty? What moral
reasoning and strategies offer alternatives to using physical violence in a social movement to gain civil
rights? Our seminar examines the American Civil Rights Movement 1954 and 1968, and compares the
writings of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. and Malcolm X to learn about nonviolent direct action, self‐defense,
and the use of "any means necessary" to right the wrongs of racial injustice. 6 credits; SI, IDS; Not offered
2022‐23
POSC 160 Political Philosophy Introduction to ancient and modern political philosophy. We will investigate
several fundamentally different approaches to the basic questions of politics‐‐questions concerning the
character of political life, the possibilities and limits of politics, justice, and the good society‐‐and the
philosophic presuppositions (concerning human nature and human flourishing) that underlie these, and all,
political questions. 6 credits; HI, WR2; Fall, Spring; Mihaela Czobor‐Lupp, Laurence D Cooper
POSC 170 International Relations and World Politics What are the foundational theories and practices of
international relations and world politics? This course addresses topics of a geopolitical, commercial and
ideological character as they relate to global systems including: great power politics, polycentricity, and
international organizations. It also explores the dynamic intersection of world politics with war, terrorism,
nuclear weapons, national security, human security, human rights, and the globalization of economic and
social development. 6 credits; SI, IS; Fall, Winter, Spring; Tun Myint, Greg G Marfleet

334
POSC 201 Statecraft and the Tools of National Power This course covers the science and art of statecraft,
which is the application of the tools of national power. Students will study how nations use diplomatic,
economic, and military power to achieve stated national policy objectives. The course is team‐taught by
three career national security professionals. Case studies are used to assess the application of diplomatic,
economic, and military power in the real world. Course readings, papers, and significant classroom
discussion will deliver content to students and set the stage for the International Strategic Crisis
Negotiation Exercise, which is a graded part of the course. 6 credits; SI, IS; Spring; Jon R Olson, Ross L
Wilson, Thomas R Hanson
POSC 202 Tools of National Power: Statecraft and Diplomatic Power In this section of three related five‐
week courses, we will study the role of diplomacy as a component of U.S. statecraft. An active and
informed diplomacy can help achieve international cooperation in the face of shared global threats, while
helping to forestall conflict and forwarding U.S. national interests. Yet in recent decades, diplomacy has
often been overshadowed by military intervention and economic sanctions as a tool of power. We will
discuss the history of diplomacy, including the specific traditions of U.S. diplomatic practice. Using case
studies taken from current issues, we will assess how diplomacy functions in practice and reflect on the
future role of diplomats in a world of dramatic change. Course modalities will include focused readings,
active class discussion, and short papers. 3 credits; SI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
POSC 203 Political Communication: Political Advertising in Elections and Public Policy Crosslisted with POSC
303. How does political advertising influence the electorate? How does political advertising influence our
understanding of policy proposals? Election ads along with the six‐second "sound bite" are now among the
major forms of political communication in modern democracies. Add to these forms a battery of visual
"arguments" seen in news media, film, and paid ads aimed at persuading us to adopt various policy
positions. We will study how ads are created and "work" from the standpoint of political psychology and
film analysis. 6 credits; QRE, SI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
POSC 204 How American Campaigns and Elections Work (and Don’t Work) Campaigns and elections are the
cornerstones of our democracy. Formally, they are the way we select our elected officials; informally they
tell us a lot about the American ethos, the preferences of particular demographics, and the future direction
of our country. The course will draw from scholarship in political psychology, political behavior and
participation, and public opinion and will examine American campaigns and elections through three lenses:
the institutional structures that guide them; the candidates and voters that participate in them; and the
political scientists who study them. 6 credits; QRE, SI, IDS, WR2; Fall; Brian F Harrison
POSC 205 News Media and Democratic Electoral Processes How have news media affected democratic
elections in the U.S., UK, and EU? Case studies show traditional and new media—from citizen journalism to
bots—shaping views of candidates and issues—and democracy itself. Using recent elections worldwide as a
base, we will investigate traditional media as an institution in a challenging environment of new media
sources and charges of “fake news.” Coursework includes learning about research design through original
data collection, data analysis, and visual representation of data. Political Science 223 is recommended as a
way to learn quantitative and qualitative methods of social science research. 6 credits; SI, QRE, IDS; Not
offered 2022‐23
POSC 206 Tools of National Power: Statecraft and Economic Power In this section of three related five‐week
courses covering the Tools of National Power, we’ll assess the economic mechanisms governments use to
advance their interests and influence others. Nations have always used economic policies in efforts to
secure prosperity, address economic, political, and security priorities, and, where necessary, confront other
states. We’ll look at the application of economic power and seek to assess the efficacy and effect of

335
economic tools in international relations. Course readings, short papers, and significant classroom
discussion will deliver content to students and set the stage for the final course, diplomacy, in the study of
the Tools of National Power. 3 credits; SI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
POSC 209 Money and Politics Modern elections have become multibillion‐dollar ventures. How does money
influence electoral and policy outcomes in the United States? Who donates and why do people or groups
donate? Where does all the money go? How has campaign finance been regulated and what are proposed
reforms? Focusing on recent elections, we will explore these questions by delving into the world of
campaign finance. 6 credits; SI, QRE, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
POSC 210 Misinformation, Political Rumors, and Conspiracy Theories Why do people believe in conspiracy
theories, hold on to misinformed beliefs even in the face of mounting evidence to the contrary, and/or
spread political and social rumors that may have little basis in fact? Who is most vulnerable to these various
forms of misinformation? What are the normative and political consequences of misperceptions (if any)?
This course explores the psychological, political, and philosophical approaches to the study of the causes,
consequences, and tenacity of conspiracy beliefs, misinformation, and political rumors, as well as possible
approaches that journalists could employ to combat misperceptions. 6 credits; SI, IDS; Spring; Christina E
Farhart
POSC 213 Psychology of Mass Political Behavior This course explores the political psychology of individual
judgment and choice. We will examine the role of cognition, emotions, values, predispositions, and social
identities on judgment and choice. From this approach, we will address the larger debate regarding the
quality of democratic citizenship. 6 credits; SI, WR2, QRE, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
POSC 214 Visual Representations of Political Thought and Action Visual media offer an alternative method
of framing political ideas and events. Images found in such texts as film, posters, and even in statistical
tables can enlighten‐‐or mislead. Readings in visual theory, political psychology, and graphic representation
will enable you to read images and use these powerful media to convey your ideas and research. 3 credits;
LA, QRE; Spring; Barbara Allen
POSC 215 Comparative Political Communication: News Coverage of Elections This course will focus on the
major theories of political communication in election advertising and political news contexts. Our case
studies will focus on recent U.S., French, and UK elections. We compare the legal and cultural contexts of
election news coverage and advertising in these countries and analyze media effects on voter perceptions
using political psychology studies based on research in the U.S., UK, and EU. 6 credits; QRE, SI, IS; Fall;
Barbara Allen
POSC 216 Politics in the Post‐Truth Society We live in an age marked by attacks on democratic institutions,
suspicion of expertise, and a general sense that facts are disposable in the face of inconvenient truths. This
course will examine misinformation and anti‐intellectualism in the past and today, how and why people
adopt misinformation and conspiracy theories, the political effects of the post‐truth era, and what mitigates
the spread of misinformation. Through readings, discussions, and investigative projects, students will both
advance their knowledge on the topic and learn to better evaluate information and evidence. This course
focuses on the United States but occasionally includes a comparative and/or non‐U.S. perspective. 6
credits; SI, WR2, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
POSC 217 Monuments, Museums & Meaning: How Politics Shapes Memory in Artifacts Why was naming
the Smithsonian Museum of the American Indian “political?” Why is the Smithsonian’s Anacostia Museum
not on the Washington DC Mall? What is memorialized by the Shanghai Jewish Refugees Museum? Why
care about the eight Confederate leaders in the U.S. Capitol (or other public places)? This class examines

336
museums and monuments as important types of political communication that preserve cultural artifacts,
create historical records, and tell present and future generations the meaning of communities and
individuals. We learn about various practices including funding, naming, acquiring, appropriating, placing,
designing, and constructing the artifacts that house community memories. 3 credits; SI, IDS; Not offered
2022‐23
POSC 218 Schools, Scholarship and Policy in the United States What can scholarship tell us about
educational strategies to reduce achievement gaps and economic opportunity? Do the policies promoted at
the city, state and federal levels reflect that knowledge? How are these policies made? What is the
relationship between schools and the economic class, racial composition and housing stock of their
neighborhoods? Prerequisite: Sophomore Standing. 6 credits; SI, IDS, WR2, QRE; Not offered 2022‐23
POSC 220 Politics and Political History in Film How do representations of politics in film influence our ideas
about governance, citizenship, power, and authority? How do film and TV reflect values and beliefs of
democratic society, particularly in the United States? These are two questions that we will consider in the
course as we study films representing politics and historical events in fiction and non‐fiction genres for
entertainment and education. Films to be analyzed include: Battle of Algiers, Fog of War, Cape Fear (1963),
Manchurian Candidate (1960), Advise and Consent, All the President's Men, Primary, War Room, The
Mushroom Club, When the Levees Broke. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
POSC 221 Latin American Politics Comparative study of political institutions and conflicts in selected Latin
American countries. Attention is focused on general problems and patterns of development, with some
emphasis on U.S.‐Latin American relations. 6 credits; SI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
POSC 222 Political Science Lab: Interviewing Techniques This class provides a hands‐on introduction to how
researchers devise, conduct, and analyze interviews in political science. Students will learn about different
types of interview methodologies, including elite and non‐elite, structured, semi‐structured, and intensive
approaches. Over the course of the class, students will consider the types of questions most appropriately
answered by interviews, the fundamentals of different sampling strategies, how to devise questionnaires,
and how to use the information collected for both quantitative and qualitative analysis. We will also cover
interview ethics, how to employ culturally sensitive techniques, and how to employ interviews in individual,
group, and crowd situations. 3 credits; SI, QRE; Not offered 2022‐23
POSC 223 Political Science Lab: Content Analysis How do we know if a news organization is ideologically
biased? How do we show that gender influences how world leaders approach defense policy? How do we
track the growth in misinformation in political advertising worldwide? One foundational methodology for
studying questions like these is content analysis. This course will enable you to analyze the texts of
speeches, debates, news stories, tweets, press conferences, letters, ad texts‐‐and the visual representations
that accompany many of these forms of communication. Students will learn the basics of defining content,
operationalizing variables, and conducting the analysis to get valid, reliable data. 3 credits; SI, IDS, QRE; Not
offered 2022‐23
POSC 227 Contemporary Capitalisms This course examines the intersections between political and
economic power: how markets are embedded in social and political institutions and how they in turn shape
political life and institutions. It begins with a survey of classic and contemporary theoretical frameworks,
followed by an overview of the history of contemporary market economies and the search for
“development,” both in the global north as well as the south. It then analyzes the contemporary varieties of
capitalism across the globe, with a focus on their varying responses to challenges like globalization,

337
economic crises, technological transformations, and climate change. 6 credits; SI, IS; Spring; Juan Diego
Prieto
POSC 229 The U.S. Congress: Coordination and Conflict How does Congress make public policy? What
factors inhibit or enhance legislative productivity? Is the policymaking process too partisan? This course
provides a comprehensive introduction to congressional organization and procedures, the policy process,
and the core debates and theories surrounding legislative politics in the United States Congress. The path of
policy within Congress is an incredibly complex and conflict‐ridden coordination problem. As a class, we will
explore how the underlying motivations to win office, produce policy, and gain prestige drive congressional
member behaviors. We will also carefully consider the institutional details of the House and Senate that
constrain these legislative actors and influence legislative outcomes. 6 credits; SI; Not offered 2022‐23
POSC 230 Methods of Political Research An introduction to research method, research design, and the
analysis of political data. The course is intended to introduce students to the fundamentals of scientific
inquiry as they are employed in the discipline. The course will consider the philosophy of scientific research
generally, the philosophy of social science research, theory building and theory testing, the components of
applied (quantitative and qualitative) research across the major sub‐fields of political science, and basic
methodological tools. Intended for majors only. Prerequisite: Statistics 120, 230, 250, (formerly
Mathematics 215, 245, 275), AP Statistics (score of 4 or 5) or Psychology 200/201 or
Sociology/Anthropology 239. 6 credits; SI, WR2, QRE; Fall, Winter, Spring; Greg G Marfleet, Christina E
Farhart
POSC 231 American Foreign Policy An introduction to the actors and processes of American foreign
policymaking and to the substance of American foreign policy. The course aims to provide students with an
understanding of how knowledge of the past, the global policy environment, the processes of foreign
policymaking, and the specifics of a foreign policy issue come together to help determine modern American
foreign policy. The course will review the structure of the international system of states, state power and
interests, the historical context of American foreign policy, actors in American foreign affairs, models of
foreign policy decision making, and the instruments of foreign policy. Prerequisite: Political Science 122, AP
American Government, or AP U.S. History is highly recommended. 6 credits; SI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
POSC 232 Political Science Lab Focus Group Analysis This lab offers a hands‐on experience in designing and
moderating a small group discussion for the purpose of observing not only attitudes, beliefs, and opinions
but also dynamic social interactions as a method for getting answers to complex, dynamic social science
research questions. Students will design a focus group study, learning about participant selection and
recruitment; question writing and protocol design; group conversation moderation; data extraction and
analysis, report writing, and overall project and data management. 3 credits; SI, IDS, QRE; Fall; Barbara
Allen
POSC 235 The Endless War on Terror In the aftermath of 9/11, the U.S. launched the Global War on Terror
to purportedly find, stop,and defeat every terrorist group with a global reach. Without question, the Global
War on Terror has radically shaped everything from U.S. foreign policies and domestic institutions to civil
liberties and pop culture. In this course, we will examine the events of 9/11 and then critically assess the
immediate and long‐term ramifications of the endless Global War on Terror on different states and
communities around the world. While we will certainly spend time interrogating U.S. policies from the
Bush, Obama, and Trump administrations, we will also examine reactions to those policies across both the
global north and the global south. 6 credits; NE, WR2, IS; Winter

338
POSC 236 Global, National and Human Security What are the greatest threats to national and global
security? In this course we will explore a range of traditional security topics including: the proliferation of
WMDs, terrorism, piracy, insurgencies, arms races, territorial disputes and strategic rivalries. In addition to
these classic concerns, we also consider newer ones such as cyber‐security, the threat of global pandemics,
unmanned warfare and the impact of climate change. Our study begins and concludes with the debate over
the concept of security in the twenty‐first century. 6 credits; SI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
POSC 238 Sport & Globalization London/Seville Pgm: Globalization and Development: Lessons from Int'l
Football This course uses international football (soccer) as a lens to analyze topics in globalization, such as
immigration and labor, inequality, foreign investment, trade in services, and intellectual property. Students
will be presented with key debates in these areas and then use cases from international football as
illustrations. Focusing on the two wealthiest leagues in Europe, the English Premier League and the Spanish
Liga, students will address key issues in the study of globalization and development, and in doing so
enhance their understanding of the world, sports, and sport's place in the world. 6 credits; SI, IS; Not
offered 2022‐23
POSC 239 The Poor and the Powerless This course examines the foundations of development and
globalization, their representations as historical processes, their manifestations over time, and their
advocates and detractors. This will be done against the backdrop of empirical and substantive
representations of actually‐existing development outcomes and globalization processes, their organization,
and their practices. This course employs a critical approach to development and is taught from a political
economy perspective. In particular, it deals with the relationship between theory, ideology and practice by
contrasting classical approaches with critical, Marxist, and radical approaches. It examines outcomes of
development practice, both positive and negative, through a focus on globalization. 6 credits; SI, IS; Not
offered 2022‐23
POSC 240 At the Corner of Broadway and Main Street: The Contrasting Politics of Northfield and the Twin
Cities According to the 2020 U.S. Census, roughly 328.2 million people live in the United States. Of that
population, 63% live in one of 19,500 “incorporated places,” defined as a city, town ,village, or borough
with legally‐prescribed limits, powers, and functions. However, three‐quarters of incorporated places have
fewer than 5,000 people; 42% have fewer than 500 people. In fact, only 40% of all cities have a population
of 50,000 or more in 2019, yet nearly 39% of the U.S. population live in those cities. A majority of human
social, political, and economic interactions now happen in urban areas (like the Twin Cities) but a significant
portion of American life is experienced in smaller towns (like Northfield). Utilizing established social
theories, critical thinking skills, and common research techniques, we will learn how to bolster our
understanding of both rural and urban phenomena, policies, and processes, addressing topics like political,
racial, and class polarization; intolerance; health care; housing, development, and zoning, and
transportation. Through field visits to and speakers from both the Twin Cities and Northfield, we will chart
the urban/rural political divide to provide a richer understanding of politics and policy in all corners of the
United States. 6 credits; NE, WR2, QRE; Fall; Brian F Harrison
POSC 241 Ethnic Conflict Ethnic conflict is a persistent and troubling challenge for those interested in
preserving international peace and stability. By one account, ethnic violence has claimed more than ten
million lives since 1945, and in the 1990s, ethnic conflicts comprised nearly half of all ongoing conflicts
around the world. In this course, we will attempt to understand the conditions that contribute to ethnic
tensions, identify the triggers that lead to escalation, and evaluate alternative ideas for managing and
solving such disputes. The course will draw on a number of cases, including Rwanda, Bosnia, and Northern
Ireland. 6 credits; SI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23

339
POSC 242 Middle East Politics This course introduces the politics and political structures of states in the
Middle East. We explore the political origins of Middle Eastern states, and investigate how regional politics
are shaped by colonialism, religion, tribes, the family, and more. We examine the persistence of
authoritarianism and its links to other issues like nationalism and militarism. The course covers how recent
and current events like the revolutionary movements of the ‘Arab Spring’ civil society affect the states and
their societies. We conclude with a consideration of the future of Middle Eastern politics, evaluating
lingering concerns and emerging prospects for liberalization and reform. 6 credits; SI, IS, WR2; Not offered
2022‐23
POSC 244 The Politics of Eurovision At first glance, Eurovision, the decades‐long, continent‐wide singing
contest, is nothing more than a mindless pop culture event. Dismissed as a celebration of (at best)
mediocre music, Eurovision seems like it would be the last place to learn about serious politics. In this class,
however, we will explore Eurovision as a place where art is deeply political and often engages in debates
about gender and sexuality, race, the legacies of colonialism, war and revolution, nationalism, and
democracy—not just within the context of the competition itself but how these discussions spill over into
broader social and political dynamics. 3 credits; SI, IS; Spring; Dev Gupta
POSC 247 Comparative Nationalism Nationalism is an ideology that political actors have frequently
harnessed to support a wide variety of policies ranging from intensive economic development to genocide.
But what is nationalism? Where does it come from? And what gives it such emotional and political power?
This course investigates competing ideas about the sources of nationalism, its evolution, and its political
uses in state building, legitimation, development, and war. We will consider both historic examples of
nationalism, as well as contemporary cases drawn from Europe, the Middle East, Asia, and the United
States. 6 credits; SI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
POSC 249 From the International to the Global: Critical Theories of World Politics Why is the world divided
territorially? Why are some states considered more powerful than others? What can be done about violent
conflict? This course will introduce students with critical approaches to world politics that ask these and
other big questions. Marxist, feminist, post‐structuralist and post‐colonial scholars have challenged classical
approaches of thinking about the international in terms of states and power. They have also questioned the
dominance of western conceptions of politics in the way political scientists view the world. In this course
will read and debate their contributions and apply them to real cases. 6 credits; SI, IS; Spring; Paul
Petzschmann
POSC 250 Kings, Tyrants, Philosophers: Plato's Republic In this course we will read Plato’s Republic, perhaps
the greatest and surely the most important work of political philosophy ever written. What are the deepest
needs and the most powerful longings of human nature? Can they be fulfilled, and, if so, how? What are
the deepest needs of society, and can they be fulfilled? What is the relation between individual happiness
and societal well‐being? Are they compatible or in conflict with one another? And where they are in
conflict, what does justice require that we do? The Republic explores these questions in an imaginative and
unforgettable way. 6 credits; HI; Not offered 2022‐23
POSC 251 Modern Political Philosophy: Liberalism and Its Critics Liberalism has been the dominant political
philosophy of our age, and we who live in a liberal polity have been shaped by it. But liberalism has been,
and continues to be, the target of sharp critique. What is liberalism, and what can be said both for and
against it? In this course we will examine liberalism’s philosophic roots and engage with some of its most
forceful advocates and most profound critics. Readings will be drawn from authors such as Locke,
Montesquieu, Rousseau, Marx, Mill, and Tocqueville. 6 credits; HI, IS; Winter; Laurence D Cooper

340
POSC 252 Free Expression: the Good, the Bad, and the Ugly Freedom of expression has never lacked
obstacles or opponents, even if its opponents have often claimed to be friends. In recent years, however,
both the possibility and the desirability of free expression have been openly contested on moral, political,
and philosophic grounds. Is free expression simply good, or does it also impose costs? What is the relation
between freedom of expression and freedom of thought or mind? Is freedom of mind even possible? These
will be our questions. Readings will be drawn from philosophers ranging from Plato to Nietzsche and from
political essayists such as George Orwell and Vaclav Havel. 6 credits; HI; Not offered 2022‐23
POSC 253 Welfare Capitalisms in Post‐War Europe In this course students will explore the different kinds of
welfare states that exist in Europe, the political economic and social conditions that made them possible
and the debates about their strengths, weaknesses and prospects. We will review the so‐called “varieties of
capitalism” literature along with key welfare policies such as social insurance, health care, education,
unemployment insurance, family and income support, and pensions. Welfare states use combinations of
these policies differently to insure citizens against “old” and “new” risks. Finally, the course looks at how
welfare regimes have responded of migration, financial, and public health crises. 6 credits; SI, IS; Fall; Paul
Petzschmann
POSC 254 Freedom, Excellence, Happiness: Aristotle's Ethics What does it mean to be morally excellent? To
be politically excellent? To be intellectually and spiritually excellent? Are these things mutually compatible?
Do they lie within the reach of everyone? And what is the relation between excellence and pleasure?
Between excellence and happiness? Aristotle addresses these questions in intricate and illuminating detail
in the Nicomachean Ethics, which we will study in this course. The Ethics is more accessible than some of
Aristotle's other works. But it is also a multifaceted and multi‐layered book, and one that reveals more to
those who study it with care. 6 credits; HI; Not offered 2022‐23
POSC 255 Post‐Modern Political Thought The thought and practice of the modern age have been found
irredeemably oppressive, alienating, dehumanizing, and/or exhausted by a number of leading philosophic
thinkers in recent years. In this course we will explore the critiques and alternative visions offered by a
variety of post‐modern thinkers, including Nietzsche (in many ways the first post‐modern), Heidegger,
Foucault, and Derrida. 6 credits; HI; Not offered 2022‐23
POSC 256 Nietzsche: Beyond Good and Evil Nietzsche understood himself to be living at a moment of great
endings: the exhaustion of modernity, the self‐undermining of rationalism, the self‐overcoming of morality‐
‐in short, stunningly, the "death of God." He regarded these endings as an unprecedented disaster for
humanity but also as an unprecedented opportunity, and he pointed the way to a new ideal and a new
culture that would be life‐affirming and life‐enhancing. This course will center on close study of Beyond
Good and Evil, perhaps Nietzsche's most beautiful book and probably his most political one. Selections from
some of his other books will also be assigned. 6 credits; HI; Not offered 2022‐23
POSC 257 Marxist Political Thought A discussion seminar focussed on an in‐depth reading of Karl Marx’s
“Capital” as well as an exploration of "Marxism after Marx” in the work of Engels, Lenin and Bernstein. The
second part of the course will focus on themes raised by Marx in the Political Economy literature today:
economic growth and inequality, the role of the state, taxation and redistribution. 6 credits; SI, IS; Winter;
Paul Petzschmann
POSC 258 Politics and Ambition Is personal ambition a threat to peace and the public good or is it a prod to
nobility and heroism? Does it exemplify the opposition between self and society or does it represent their
intersection and mutual support—or both? And what is the nature of political ambition, especially the
ambition to rule: what does the would‐be ruler really want? We will take up these and related questions by

341
studying several classic works of philosophy and literature. Readings will likely include works by Plato,
Xenophon, and Shakespeare as well as American founders, statesmen, and moral leaders. 6 credits; HI;
Spring; Laurence D Cooper
POSC 259 Justice Among Nations The purpose of this course is to bring to bear great works of political
philosophy on the foundational questions of international politics. Our primary text will be Thucydides'
gripping history of The Peloponnesian War. Thucydides was perhaps the greatest thinker about
international relations that the world has seen. He was also a political philosopher‐‐and psychologist‐‐of the
first rank. His book teaches much not only about politics but about human nature. 6 credits; SI; Not offered
2022‐23
POSC 260 "A Savage Made to Inhabit Cities": The Political Philosophy of Rousseau In this course we will
study what Rousseau considered his greatest and best book: Emile. Emile is a philosophic novel. It uses a
thought experiment‐‐the rearing of a child from infancy to adulthood‐‐to explore human nature and the
human condition, including their political dimensions. Among Emile's themes are natural goodness and the
origins of evil; self‐love and sociability; the differences and relations between the sexes; citizenship; and the
principles of political right. The book also addresses the question of how one might live naturally and
happily amid an unnatural and unhappy civilization. 6 credits; HI; Not offered 2022‐23
POSC 261 The Global Crisis of Democracy Democracy is in trouble worldwide. The most visible indicators
are the rise of explicitly anti‐democratic leaders and anti‐liberal parties that employ populism and exploit
ethnic and ideological polarization to acquire power. Democratic norms and institutions have eroded across
the globe. Structures that undergirded the positive‐sum linkage between industrialization, the rise of labor
unions, and democratic parties in much of the West have been transformed in ways that undermine
democracy. This course will analyze these and related trends that demonstrate that liberal democracy is
suffering a global crisis. Instruction will cover cases across time and from all regions of the world. 6 credits;
SI, QRE, IS; Spring; Alfred P Montero
POSC 262 Displaced Lives: Freedom and Meaning To feel secure and accepted by society are essential
human needs. However, even a cursory look at the twentieth century shows how often and unexpectedly
the lives of individuals were profoundly disrupted and crushed by the forces of nature and history. Security
and social acceptance are fragile gifts of history. If so, what freedom and meaning, if at all, are to be found
in living a displaced life, against and through the destructive tidal waves of history? The course tries
to answer this question through an engagement with the memoirs and writings of Stefan Zweig, Edward
Said, Norman Manea, Mikhail Bulgakov, Karl Ove Knausgaard, and James Baldwin. 6 credits; HI; Not offered
2022‐23
POSC 263 Revolutions in the Age of Internet Do you want to create a revolution? This course studies how
the Internet and social media present challenges and possibilities of expanding human freedom and
democracy. How have the dynamics of revolutions been shaped by the Internet? What are the differences
between revolutions before and after the Internet? Are agency and freedom of individuals different in
actual and virtual worlds? What are the rising challenges and possibilities for democracy to capitalize on
digital freedom? What are the theories and analytical concepts that will help us understand the rise of
digital individuals and the future of freedom? The course primarily focuses on the politics and history of the
democracy movement in Myanmar/Burma while students will comparatively study revolutions in other
countries. 6 credits; SI, IS; Fall; Tun Myint
POSC 264 Politics of Contemporary China This course examines the political, social, and economic
transformation of China over the past century. Though contemporary issues are at the heart of the course,

342
students will delve into an entire century of changes and upheaval to understand the roots of current
affairs in China. Particular emphasis will be placed on state‐building and how this has changed state‐society
relations at the grassroots. Students will also explore how the Chinese Communist Party has survived and
even thrived while many other Communist regimes have fallen and assess the relationship between
economic development and democratization. 6 credits; SI, IS; Fall; Huan Gao
POSC 265 Public Policy and Global Capitalism This course provides a comprehensive introduction to
comparative and international public policy. It examines major theories and approaches to public policy
design and implementation in several major areas: international policy economy (including the study of
international trade and monetary policy, financial regulation, and comparative welfare policy), global public
health and comparative healthcare policy, institutional development (including democratic governance,
accountability systems, and judicial reform), and environmental public policy. Prerequisite: Statistics 120
(formerly Mathematics 215) strongly recommended, or instructor permission. 6 credits; SI, QRE, IS; Winter;
Alfred P Montero
POSC 266 Urban Political Economy City revenue is increasingly dependent on tourism. Cities manufacture
identity and entertainment, whether we think of Las Vegas or Jerusalem, Berlin or Bilbao, the ethnoscapes
of Copenhagen or the red light district of Amsterdam. As cities compete in the global economy to become
playgrounds for a transnational tourist class, what is the role of urban residents? Who governs? Who
benefits? Short essays or exams will be required. 6 credits; SI, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
POSC 268 Global Environmental Politics and Policy Global environmental politics and policy is the most
prominent field that challenges traditional state‐centric ways of thinking about international problems and
solutions. This course examines local‐global dynamics of environmental problems. The course will cover five
arenas crucial to understanding the nature and origin of global environmental politics and policymaking
mechanisms: (1) international environmental law; (2) world political orders; (3) human‐environment
interactions through politics and markets; (4) paradigms of sustainable development; and (5) dynamics of
human values and rules. 6 credits; SI, WR2, QRE, IS; Spring; Tun Myint
POSC 269 I Did My Own Research: Information and Political Division in America Many Americans sense that
polarization makes governance harder; scholars argue that polarization can undermine democracy itself.
How do we manage difficult problems in a polarized political era? Can we ever agree if we are so free to
pursue information that only supports what we already believe? We examine group identity in American
culture and how boundaries affect attitudes and behavior as well as information around policy disputes
around incarceration/policing, free speech, LGBTQ rights, health care, elections, immigration, and more.
Finally, we consider how to reduce unproductive polarization for a better America even when we don’t
agree on what better entails. 6 credits; SI, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
POSC 270 Political Philosophy and the Book of Genesis Much of the moral and political architecture of the
post‐modern, secular world traces back to pre‐modern, religious scriptures‐‐especially Genesis, the first
book of the Bible. For this reason alone Genesis deserves attention. But there are even stronger reasons:
With its accounts of creation, humanity’s relation to nature and the divine, human aspiration and failure,
the origins of community, and the good life for both individuals and societies, Genesis offers enormous
riches even for those who approach it from an "external" philosophic standpoint (as we will in this class)
rather than an "internal" religious one. Readings include Genesis and commentary. 6 credits; HI; Not
offered 2022‐23
POSC 271 Constitutional Law I This course will explore the United States Constitution and the legal
doctrines that have emerged from it, using them as lenses through which to understand the history—and

343
shape the future—of this country. Using prominent Supreme Court opinions as teaching tools and loci of
debate (including cases on the Court’s recent and current docket), this course will explore the different kind
of theoretical approaches with which to make Constitutional arguments and interpret the Constitution. It is
one of two paired courses (the other being POSC 272) that complement each other. Both courses will
address the structure and functioning of the United States government, and will explore in greater depth
the historic Constitutional “trends” towards greater equality and more liberty (albeit slowly, haltingly, and
with steps both forward and backward). This course will focus in particular on how matters of racial justice
have been a Constitutional issue from the very beginning of the nation—and very much remain unfinished
legal work. In exploring matters of personal liberty, this course will focus in particular on First Amendment
freedom of religion. Finally, in examining governmental structures, this course will emphasize federalism
and the distribution of power between the national and state governments, including the rise of a
nationwide economic system and the modern administrative state. The course will require close reading of
judicial opinions and other texts, and learning how to construct arguments using logic and precedent. A
special feature of this course will be detailed examination and intra‐class mock debate of the cases the
Supreme Court will hear this fall challenging raced‐based affirmative action programs at private and public
universities. 6 credits; SI; Winter; Steven G Poskanzer
POSC 272 Constitutional Law II This course will explore the United States Constitution and the legal
doctrines that have emerged from it, using them as lenses through which to understand the history—and
shape the future—of this country. Using prominent Supreme Court opinions as teaching tools and loci of
debate (including cases on the Court’s recent and current docket), this course will explore the different kind
of theoretical approaches with which to make Constitutional arguments and interpret the Constitution. It is
one of two paired courses (the other being POSC 271) that complement each other. Both courses will
address the structure and functioning of the United States government, and will explore in greater depth
the historic Constitutional “trends” towards greater equality and more liberty (albeit slowly, haltingly, and
with steps both forward and backward). This course will focus in particular on how gender equality is very
much unfinished Constitutional work on our way towards a “more perfect union.” This topic will include an
examination of the Court’s recent controversial decision in Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health
Organization In exploring matters of personal liberty, this course will focus in particular on First
Amendment freedom of speech and other fundamental rights protected under the 14th Amendment’s Due
Process Clause. Finally, in examining governmental structures, this course will emphasize the separation of
powers across the branches of the federal government. The course will require close reading of judicial
opinions and other texts, and learning how to construct arguments using logic and precedent. POSC 271 is
not a prerequisite for POSC 272. The two courses can be taken independently, although having taking POSC
271 will provide students with a broader and more nuanced foundation for exploring the themes covered
of this course 6 credits; SI; Spring; Steven G Poskanzer
POSC 273 Race and Politics in the U.S. This course addresses race and ethnicity in U.S. politics. Following an
introduction to historical, sociological, and psychological approaches to the study of race and ethnicity, we
apply these approaches to understanding the ways in which racial attitudes have been structured along a
number of political and policy dimensions, e.g., welfare, education, criminal justice. Students will gain an
increased understanding of the multiple contexts that shape contemporary racial and ethnic politics and
policies in the U.S., and will consider the role of institutional design, policy development, representation,
and racial attitudes among the general U.S. public and political environment. 6 credits; SI, IDS; Fall; Christina
E Farhart
POSC 274 Globalization, Pandemics, and Human Security What are the challenges of the COVID‐19
pandemic on global politics and public policy? How do state responses to COVID‐19 as well as historical

344
cases such as the Black Death in Europe, the SARS outbreak in East Asia and Middle East, and the Ebola
outbreak in Africa help us understand the scientific, political, and economic challenges of pandemics on
countries and communities around the world? We will apply theories and concepts from IR, political
economy, and natural sciences to explore these questions and consider what we can learn from those
responses to address other global challenges like climate change. 6 credits; SI, WR2, QRE, IS; Not offered
2022‐23
POSC 275 Black Radical Political Thought, 1919‐1969 This course examines the history of Black radical
political thought in the United States between 1919 and 1969. It also explores internationalist and diasporic
linkages that shaped, and were shaped by, the U.S. context. "Black Radicalism" refers to the forms of
politics and thought that have challenged, nationally and globally, economic exploitation, social inequality,
political marginalization, and private and state‐sanctioned anti‐blackness. The political ideologies and
practices we will consider include: Black nationalism, pan‐Africanism, socialism and communism, and Black
feminisms. The course will also pay special attention to the socio‐historical and political economic contexts
that give rise to different forms of Black radicalism. 6 credits; SI, WR2, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
POSC 276 Imagination in Politics: Resisting Totalitarianism Ideological fanaticism is on the rise today.
Individuals prefer the incantation of slogans and clichés to autonomous thinking, moderation, and care for
the diversity and complexity of circumstances and of human beings. The results are the inability to converse
across differences and the tendency to ostracize and exclude others in the name of tribal and populist
nationalism, as well as of racism. Hannah Arendt called totalitarianism this form of ideological hypnosis,
which characterizes not only totalitarian political regimes, but can also colonize liberal‐democracies. In this
class we will read some of the works of Arendt to better understand the power of imagination to enhance
critical and independent thinking and resist totalitarianism. 6 credits; HI, IS; Fall; Mihaela Czobor‐Lupp
POSC 277 Religion in Politics: Conflict or Dialogue? The course explores the relationship between religion
and politics, especially in multicultural societies where believers and nonbelievers alike must live together.
The leading question of the course is if religion is a source of violence, as seems to be so much the case in
the world today, or if it can enter the public sphere in ways that educate and enhance the sensibility and
ability of modern individuals to live with radically different others. In the attempt to answer these
questions we will read, among others, from the writings of Kant, Habermas, Herder, Derrida, Ricoeur,
Taylor, and Zizek. 6 credits; HI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
POSC 278 Memory and Politics Central to individual and collective identity, memory can be abused through
the excess of commemoration. Is memory just a tool in the hands of nationalistic and divisive politics or can
it be used for the cosmopolitan purpose of fighting oppression and injustice? To answer this question, we
will read in this class literature on the nationalistic and cosmopolitan uses and abuses of memory and apply
the theory to two case studies: the memory of the Jewish presence in Romanian society and politics and
the role the memory of the Holocaust and Naqba plays in the relationship between Israel and Palestine. 6
credits; HI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
POSC 279 Global Challenges and Civil Society Solutions Tocqueville once remarked, “if men who live in
democratic countries did not acquire the practice of associating with each other in ordinary life, civilization
itself would be in peril.” Today, our lives are affected by a wide spectrum of these associations of ordinary
life from the Catholic Church, to international NGOs like Greenpeace, to mundane neighborhood groups.
This course investigates whether these organizations can help solve some of the most pressing global
challenges like climate change, inequality, and epidemics. We will engage classic literature about civil
society, study contemporary organizations and movements, and think critically about their political, social
and economic impact. 6 credits; SI, IS, WR2; Winter; Huan Gao

345
POSC 280 COVID‐19 and Globalization What are the challenges of the COVID‐19 pandemic on global politics
and public policy? How do state responses to COVID‐19 as well as historical cases such as the Black Death in
Europe, the SARS outbreak in East Asia and Middle East, and the Ebola outbreak in Africa help us
understand the scientific, political, and economic challenges of pandemics on countries and communities
around the world? We will apply theories and concepts from IR, political economy, and natural sciences to
explore these questions and consider what we can learn from those responses to address other global
challenges like climate change. 6 credits; SI, WR2, QRE, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
POSC 282 Terrorism and Counterterrorism This course focuses on the historic and modern use of violence
or the threat of violence by non‐state actors to secure political outcomes. We will review the strategy and
tactics of various terror groups, use case studies to understand the logic of terrorism, assess why some
groups succeed while others fail, and study terrorist organizations’ efforts at recruitment and
indoctrination. These topics will be addressed from theoretical and practical perspectives, with input from
expert guest speakers. Finally, we will assess counterterrorism measures, including the moral, ethical, legal,
and practical approaches to creating security in the modern world. 6 credits; SI, IS; Winter; Jon R Olson
POSC 283 Separatist Movements This course explores the emergence and resolution of separatist
movements around the world. While separatist movements are often associated with the violent
dissolution of states, not all separatist movements result in violence and not all separatist movements seek
independence. We will investigate the conditions under which separatist pressures are most likely to
develop and when such pressures result in actual separation. We will contrast the tactics of movements,
from peaceful approaches in places like contemporary Quebec or Scotland, to peaceful outcomes like the
"velvet divorce" of Czechoslovakia, to violent insurrections in places like the Philippines, Spain, and
Northern Ireland. 6 credits; SI, QRE, IS; Winter; Dev Gupta
POSC 284 War and Peace in Northern Ireland This class examines the decades‐long conflict in Northern
Ireland between Catholics and Protestants known as "The Troubles." We will investigate the causes of
violence in this region and explore the different phases of the conflict, including initial mobilization of
peaceful protestors, radicalization into violent resistance, and de‐escalation. We will also consider the
international dimensions of the conflict and how groups forged transnational ties with diaspora groups and
separatist movements around the world. Finally, we will explore the consequences of this conflict on
present‐day Northern Ireland's politics and identify lessons from the peace process for other societies in
conflict. 6 credits; SI, IS; Spring; Dev Gupta
POSC 285 The U.S. Intelligence Community This course covers the U.S. Intelligence Community, how
intelligence supports national security policy development, and how intelligence is applied to execute
strategy in pursuit of policy objectives (specifically, implementation of national security and foreign policy
initiatives). Studying the structure, processes, procedures, oversight, and capabilities of the Intelligence
Community will enhance understanding of how intelligence supported or failed policymakers in national
security decision‐making, including the areas of diplomatic and economic cooperation and engagement,
and security challenges ranging from deterrence to conventional war. The course concludes with the study
of asymmetric/hybrid warfare in our modern age and how intelligence might be used to better understand
the changing dynamics of future global conflict. 6 credits; SI, IS; Fall; Jon R Olson
POSC 288 Politics & Pub Policy in Washington DC Program: Politics and Public Policy in Washington DC
Students will participate in a seminar centered around meetings with experts in areas of global and
domestic politics and policy. Over the course of the term they will collaborate in groups to produce a
presentation exploring the political dimensions of public policy with a focus on how problem identification,

346
institutional capacity, and stakeholder interests combine to shape policy options. Prerequisite:
Mathematics 215, Statistics 120 or other statistics courses. 6 credits; SI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
POSC 294 Central and Eastern European Politics Program: Perceptions of Otherness in Modern Eastern and
Central Europe Is nationalism fundamentally flawed in its inclusionary capacity? Can the same power of
imagination to bring strangers together, which made nation‐building possible, be deployed for inventing
post‐national forms of solidarity? The course will explore representations of strangers and foreigners in
Central and Eastern Europe, throughout the nineteenth and twentieth century, with a special focus on
Roma and Jews. The aim will be to understand how these representations will work to legitimize different
forms of exclusionary politics. An important part of the course will explore the role that exiled and
displaced people can play in reimagining identities on a cosmopolitan level. 6 credits; SI, IS; Spring; Mihaela
Czobor‐Lupp
POSC 295 Central and Eastern European Politics Program: Nation‐Building in Central and Eastern Europe
between Politics and Art The state and its cultural politics played a pivotal role in building the Romanian
nation. The first part of the course will analyze the difficulties of nation‐building in modern Romania, with a
special emphasis on the incapacity of Romanian liberalism to prevent the rise of extreme right wing politics.
The second part will explore different images of Romanian national identity that art provided both during
the communist regime and in the post‐1989 decades, also in a comparative perspective with Hungary,
Bulgaria, and Serbia. The course will include visits to galleries, architectural sites and neighborhoods in
Bucharest and its surroundings. 6 credits; SI, IS; Spring; Mihaela Czobor‐Lupp
POSC 296 Central and Eastern European Politics Program: Challenges to the Nation‐State in Eastern and
Central Europe: Immigrants and Minorities How do democracies react when confronted with massive
bodies of immigrants? Do the problems that Eastern and Central European countries face in dealing with
immigrants reflect deeper challenges to their capacity of thinking of the nation along inclusionary lines? We
will explore the legal and political issues that EU countries and their societies, particularly, in Eastern and
Central Europe, face when confronted with a migration crisis. Then we will look at Roma’s history of
exploitation and injustice in Eastern and Central Europe. The course will include visits with community
groups and NGOs, as well as encounters with minority rights activists. 6 credits; SI, IS; Spring; Mihaela
Czobor‐Lupp
POSC 300 Political Research Experience This course is a collaborative, hands‐on, research seminar related to
a faculty member’s research program. Students should expect to meet regularly with the faculty supervisor
and, depending on the stage or type of research, collect and analyze data, read and interpret primary
literature and engage its criticism, submit written material and prepare presentation content. To enroll,
students must complete the application form (available on line or in the department office) in consultation
with the professor. Prerequisite: Instructor Permission. 1‐6 credit; NE; Not offered 2022‐23
POSC 302 Subordinated Politics and Intergroup Relations* How do social and political groups interact? How
do we understand these interactions in relation to power? This course will introduce the basic approaches
and debates in the study of prejudice, racial attitudes, and intergroup relations. We will focus on three
main questions. First, how do we understand and study prejudice and racism as they relate to U.S. politics?
Second, how do group identities, stereotyping, and other factors help us understand the legitimation of
discrimination, group hierarchy, and social domination? Third, what are the political and social challenges
associated with reducing prejudice? 6 credits; SI, IDS; Spring; Christina E Farhart
POSC 303 Political Communication: Political Advertising in Elections and Public Policy* Crosslisted with
POSC 203. How does political advertising influence the electorate? How does political advertising influence

347
our understanding of policy proposals? Election ads along with the 6‐second "sound bite" are now among
the major forms of political communication in modern democracies. Add to these forms a battery of visual
"arguments" seen in news media, film, and paid ads aimed at persuading us to adopt various policy
positions. We will study how ads are created and "work" from the standpoint of political psychology and
film analysis. Our policy focus for 2016 will be on climate change and the 2016 general election. Students
enrolled in the 303 version will conduct more extensive analysis of data for their seminar papers. 6 credits;
SI, QRE, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
POSC 304 Media and Electoral Politics: 2020 United States Elections Our analysis of media influences on
politics will draw from three fields of study: political psychology, political behavior and participation, and
public opinion. Students will conduct a study of the effects of campaign ads and news using our multi‐year
data set of content analyzed election ads and news. We study a variety of quantitative and qualitative
research methods to learn how political communication affects U.S. elections. Students enrolled in the
POSC 304 version will conduct more extensive analysis of data for their seminar papers. Taking POSC 304 in
conjunction with Political Science 223 is highly recommended to learn methods such as focus group, depth
interview methods, and experiment design for conducting original research on elections. 6 credits; SI, QRE,
IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
POSC 305 News Media and Democratic Electoral Processes* How have news media affected democratic
elections in the U.S., UK, and EU? Case studies show traditional and new media—from citizen journalism to
bots—shaping views of candidates and issues—and democracy itself. Using recent elections worldwide as a
base, we will investigate traditional media as an institution in a challenging environment of new media
sources and charges of “fake news.” Coursework includes learning about research design through original
data collection, data analysis, and visual representation of data. POSC 223 is recommended as a way to
learn quantitative and qualitative methods of social science research. Research paper required. 6 credits; SI,
QRE, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
POSC 306 Identity Politics and Group Behavior in America* In recent years we have heard a lot about
“identity politics.” This course aims to answer the question, why do people form group‐based identities and
how do they impact mass political attitudes and behavior? Using examples from American politics, we will
examine the psychological underpinnings of identity and group‐based affiliations as well as their political
consequences. In doing so, we will explore how bias, prejudice, and social hierarchy are formed,
maintained, and changed. Such evaluations will be based on discussions of various dominant and minority
group identities including partisanship, race/ethnicity, class, gender, sexuality, religion, and place. Students
will learn how and where the United States has progressed in promoting group equality and fairness and
where it has not or has even moved backwards. Students end the course with a deeper understanding of
the core American paradox of the persistence of group hierarchy in a country dedicated to democracy,
equality, and liberty and what people can do to resolve that paradox. 6 credits; SI, IDS; Winter; Brian F
Harrison
POSC 307 Go Our Own Way: Autonomy in the U.S. Civil Rights Movement* “Every civil rights bill was passed
for white people, not black people. I am a human being. I know … I have right(s). White people didn’t know
that. … so [they] had to … to tell that white man, 'he’s a human being, don’t stop him.' That bill was for the
white man…. I knew [my rights] all the time.” Stokely Carmichael spoke for the Student Nonviolent
Coordinating Committee viewpoint in 1966. The Black Panther Party enacted basic civic responsibilities in
their programs. Ella Baker spoke of autonomy in community. This seminar brings voices across generations
speaking to current affairs. 6 credits; SI, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23

348
POSC 308 Global Gender Politics* How have gendered divisions of power, labor, and resources contributed
to the global crises of violence, sustainability, and inequity? Where and why has the pursuit of gender
justice elicited intense backlash, especially within the last two decades? In this course, we will explore the
global consequences of gender inequality and the ongoing pursuit of gender justice both transnationally
and in different regions of the world. We will investigate a variety of cases ranging from land rights
movements in East Africa, to the international movement to ban nuclear weapons. Finally, we will pay
special attention to how hard‐won gains in women’s rights and other related inequalities in world affairs
are being jeopardized by new and old authoritarianisms. 6 credits; SI, IS; Winter
POSC 313 Legal Issues in Higher Education This seminar will explore pressing legal and policy issues facing
American colleges and universities. The course will address the ways core academic values (e.g., academic
freedom; the creation and maintenance of a community based on shared values) fit or conflict with legal
rules and political dynamics that operate beyond the academy. Likely topics include how college admissions
are shaped by legal principles, with particular emphasis on debates over affirmative action; on‐campus
speech; faculty tenure; intellectual property; student rights and student discipline (including discipline for
sexual assault); and college and university relations with the outside world. 6 credits; SI; Fall; Steven G
Poskanzer
POSC 314 Constitutional Convention 2020 Students in this course will create a podcast to consider
proposed amendments to the U.S. Constitution. Proposed amendments will be developed by students in
other courses at Carleton, St. Olaf, and other participating institutions. Students will review and select
proposals to be debated, and each proposal will be voted on at the end of the course. This advanced
seminar will include work outside of class, independently and in collaboration with other students.
Prerequisite: Political Science 271, 272 or 313 or instructor permission. 3 credits; SI; Not offered 2022‐23
POSC 315 Polarization, Parties, and Power* How have political parties shaped the distribution of power and
political landscape in the United States? This course explores theories of political party development, third‐
party dynamics in a two‐party system, and the rise of ideological and party polarization in the United
States. We will engage with scholarly debates that grapple with the extent and implications of polarization
in the American case at all levels of government, in the electorate, and in interpersonal interactions. 6
credits; SI, WR2, QRE, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
POSC 316 Nonviolent Revolutions in Latin America In this course, students will encounter ideas about
nonviolent direct action from practitioners alongside theories from a rapidly growing literature in political
science about the causes, dynamics, and consequences of civil resistance campaigns. We will then study
major social movements in Latin America, including the Mapuche movement, the #NiUnaMenos campaign
against femicide, and Brazil’s Movimento dos Trabalhadores Sem Teto (MTST). The course’s main focus,
however, will be on nonviolent struggles for democratization: the No campaign against Pinochet’s regime in
Chile, the Movimiento al Socialismo (MAS) in Bolivia, the Movimiento Autoconvocado in Nicaragua, and
recent democratic crises in Venezuela, Bolivia, and El Salvador. 6 credits; SI, WR2, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
POSC 323 Revolutionary Latin America Cycles of revolutionary upheaval and counterrevolutionary violence
punctuated Latin America’s tumultuous twentieth and twenty‐first centuries. This course compares
“successful” revolutions (Cuba [1959], Nicaragua [1979]) with “unsuccessful” (Bolivia [1952], Chile [1970])
and abortive (El Salvador, Guatemala, and Peru in the 1970s and 1980s) attempts at revolutionary change.
We will examine questions including, why do revolutionary outbreaks occur? Why do revolutionaries take
power in some countries and fail in others? How can we explain (counter‐)revolutionary mobilization,
violence, and terror? Do revolutions produce enduring social change, or reproduce enduring problems?

349
What do Latin America’s revolutionary legacies mean for twenty‐first century politics? 6 credits; SI, WR2, IS;
Not offered 2022‐23
POSC 324 Rebels and Risk Takers: Women and War in the Middle East* How are women (and gender more
broadly) shaping and shaped by war and conflict in the Middle East? Far from the trope of the subjugated,
veiled, and abused Middle Eastern woman, women in the Middle East are active social and political agents.
In wars and conflicts in the Middle East region, women have, for example, been combatants, soldiers,
activists, spies, homemakers, writers, and political leaders. This course surveys conflicts involving Lebanon,
Syria, Palestine, Israel, Jordan, and Iraq‐‐along with Western powers like the U.S., UK, and Australia‐‐
through the wartime experiences of women. 6 credits; SI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
POSC 328 Foreign Policy Analysis* Foreign policy analysis is a distinct sub‐field within international relations
that focuses on explaining the actions and choices of actors in world politics. After a review of the historical
development of the sub‐field, we will explore approaches to foreign policy that emphasize the empirical
testing of hypotheses that explain how policies and choices are formulated and implemented. The
psychological sources of foreign policy decisions (including leaders' beliefs and personalities and the effect
of decision‐making groups) are a central theme. Completion of a lower level IR course and the
stats/methods sequence is recommended. 6 credits; SI, QRE; Fall; Greg G Marfleet
POSC 329 Reinventing Humanism: A Dialogue with Tzvetan Todorov Humanism is today severely criticized
for reducing humanity to Western culture and history and for its aggressive control and destruction of the
non‐human. Concomitantly, the history of the twentieth century reveals a growing totalitarian and anti‐
humanistic tendency in (post)modern societies and their politics, to replace individual agency, freedom,
and responsibility with systemic solutions. The course explores, through a dialogue with the work of the
French thinker, Tzvetan Todorov, how being human could be reinvented today in ways that avoid the moral
and political pitfalls of the previous humanistic tradition, without devaluing, in the process, the idea of a
shared humanity. 6 credits; HI; Not offered 2022‐23
POSC 330 The Complexity of Politics* Theories of complexity and emergence relate to how large‐scale
collective properties and characteristics of a system can arise from the behavior and attributes of
component parts. This course explores the relevance of these concepts, studied mainly in physics and
biology, for the social sciences. Students will explore agent‐based modeling to discover emergent
properties of social systems through computer simulations they create using NetLogo software. Reading
and seminar discussion topics include conflict and cooperation, electoral competition, transmission of
culture and social networks. Completion of the stats/methods sequence is highly recommended. 6 credits;
SI, QRE; Not offered 2022‐23
POSC 331 Cooperation and Conflict* Why do countries go to war? What conditions promote a lasting
peace? These may well be the two most important and enduring questions in international politics. The
course combines an exploration of various theoretical approaches to war and peace—including rational,
psychological and structural models—with an empirical analysis of the onset, escalation, and resolution of
conflict. We investigate changing patterns in the frequency of global violence and identify where it occurs
more (and less) often and assess whether there is an overall trend toward a more peaceful world. 6 credits;
SI, QRE, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
POSC 333 Global Social Changes and Sustainability* This course is about the relationship between social
changes and ecological changes to understand and to be able to advance analytical concepts, research
methods, and theories of society‐nature interactions. How do livelihoods of individuals and groups change
over time and how do the changes affect ecological sustainability? What are the roles of human institutions

350
in ecological sustainability? What are the roles of ecosystem dynamics in institutional sustainability?
Students will learn fundamental theories and concepts that explain linkages between social change and
environmental changes and gain methods and skills to measure social changes qualitatively and
quantitatively. 6 credits; SI, WR2, QRE, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
POSC 335 Navigating Environmental Complexity—Challenges to Democratic Governance and Political
Communication How can we design democratic institutions to deal with environmental and social
problems? Are there universal approaches to solving political problems in physically and socially diverse
communities? Do people come up with different institutional ways to address shared problems because of
environmental or cultural differences? Our seminar considers current thinking about complex social‐
ecological systems and how we communicate and work collectively to address the problems of local and
global commons. 6 credits; SI, QRE, IS; Winter; Barbara Allen
POSC 336 Global Populist Politics* Are populist politicians scoundrels or saviors? Regardless of the answer,
populism is undeniably a growing force in politics around the world: in democracies as well as autocracies,
rich and poor countries, and involving different ideologies. How can we understand this diversity? In this
class, we will explore populism using a variety of comparative frameworks: temporal (situating the current
crop of populism in historical context), ideological (comparing populisms of the left versus the right), as well
as geographic. We will try to understand the hallmarks of populism, when and why it emerges, and its
impact on political institutions and society. 6 credits; SI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
POSC 339 LGBTQ Politics in America The advancement of LGBTQ rights in the United States has experienced
unprecedented success over the last twenty years, shifting public attitudes and legal protections for LGBTQ
Americans. This course provides a discussion of LGBTQ history and in‐depth analysis of how LGBTQ policy
victories were achieved, including background on the strategies and tactics used to generate results. We
will take a critical look at such milestones and examine what they mean for the entire LGBTQ population,
including queer people of color, transgender and gender‐nonconforming individuals, the disabled, and the
economically disadvantaged. 6 credits; SI, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
POSC 345 Politics of Dictatorship* With over half of the world's population living in non‐democracies,
understanding the nature of authoritarian regimes is a critical component of comparative political science.
We will examine the variety of authoritarian regimes around the world, the nature of state‐society relations
in different authoritarian regimes, as well as the strategies employed by dictators to maintain stability and
control. We will supplement the more general theories of authoritarian rule with detailed case studies of
particular regimes. 6 credits; SI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
POSC 348 Strangers, Foreigners and Exiles* The course explores the role that strangers play in human life,
the challenges that foreigners create for democratic politics, the promises they bring to it, as well as the
role of exiles in improving the cultural capacity of societies to live with difference. We will read texts by
Arendt, Kafka, Derrida, Sophocles, Said, Joseph Conrad, Tzvetan Todorov, and Julia Kristeva. Special
attention will be given to the plight of Roma in Europe, as a typical case of strangers that are still perceived
nowadays as a menace to the modern sedentary civilization. 6 credits; SI, IS; Winter; Mihaela Czobor‐Lupp
POSC 350 Nietzsche: Beyond Good and Evil* Cross‐listed with POSC 256. Nietzsche understood himself to
be living at a moment of great endings: the exhaustion of modernity, the self‐undermining of rationalism,
the self‐overcoming of morality in short, and most stunningly, the "death of God." Nietzsche both foresaw
and tried to accelerate these endings. But he also tried to bring about a new beginning, a culture that he
believed would be life‐affirming and life‐enhancing. In this course we will engage in a close study of Beyond

351
Good and Evil, perhaps Nietzsche's most beautiful book and probably his most political one. Selections from
some of his other books will also be assigned. 6 credits; HI; Not offered 2022‐23
POSC 352 Political Theory of Alexis de Tocqueville* This course will be devoted to close study of
Tocqueville's Democracy in America, which has plausibly been described as the best book ever written
about democracy and the best book every written about America. Tocqueville uncovers the myriad ways in
which equality, including especially the passion for equality, determines the character and the possibilities
of modern humanity. Tocqueville thereby provides a political education that is also an education toward
self‐knowledge. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
POSC 355 Identity, Culture and Rights* This course will look at the contemporary debate in multiculturalism
in the context of a variety of liberal philosophical traditions, including contractarians, libertarians, and
Utilitarians. These views of the relationship of individual to community will be compared to those of the
communitarian and egalitarian traditions. Research papers may use a number of feminist theory
frameworks and methods. 6 credits; SI, WR2, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
POSC 358 Comparative Social Movements* This course will examine the role that social movements play in
political life. The first part of the course will critically review the major theories that have been developed
to explain how social movements form, operate and seek to influence politics at both the domestic and
international levels. In the second part of the course, these theoretical approaches will be used to explore a
number of case studies involving social movements that span several different issue areas and political
regions. Potential case studies include the transnational environmental movement, religious movements in
Latin America and the recent growth of far right activism in northern Europe. 6 credits; SI, IS; Fall; Dev
Gupta
POSC 359 Cosmopolitanism Stoic philosophers saw themselves as citizens of the world (cosmopolitans), a
position that Kant enthusiastically revived in the eighteenth century. After the end of the Cold War
cosmopolitanism was back in fashion. Even the favorite drink of the girls on TV's Sex and the City was called
Cosmopolitan. However, today it seems that nationalism and xenophobia are making a powerful comeback.
Is cosmopolitanism dead? This course explores the promises and dangers of globalization, as well as the
inexhaustible attraction of nationalism. The attempt is to show that the escape from the unsettling
complexity of globalization is not within tribalistic nationalism, but rather in the cosmopolitan
transformation of identity, as well as of the sense of being at home and of belonging. 6 credits; HI; Not
offered 2022‐23
POSC 361 Approaches to Development* The meaning of "development" has been contested across multiple
disciplines. The development and continual existence of past civilizations has been at the core of the
discourse among those who study factors leading to the rise and fall of civilizations. Can we reconcile the
meaning of development in economic terms with cultural, ecological, political, religious, social and spiritual
terms? How can we measure it quantitatively? What and how do the UNDP Human Development Indexes
and the World Development Reports measure? What are the exemplary cases that illustrate development?
How do individual choices and patterns of livelihood activities link to development trends? 6 credits; SI,
WR2, QRE, IS; Winter; Tun Myint
POSC 366 Urban Political Economy* City revenue is increasingly dependent on tourism. Cities manufacture
identity and entertainment, whether we think of Las Vegas or Jerusalem, Berlin or Bilbao, the ethnoscapes
of Copenhagen or the red light district of Amsterdam. As cities compete in the global economy to become
playgrounds for a transnational tourist class, what is the role of urban residents? Who governs? Who

352
benefits? A research paper will be required. Students who have taken POSC 266 remain welcome to take
POSC 366. 6 credits; SI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
POSC 367 Social Welfare in a Time of Crisis* During COVID‐19, many countries adopted new cash transfers,
wage subsidies, and basic income experiments, among other innovative social policies, prompting major
debates on the need to transform existing social protection systems. We will examine the origins and
evolution of formal welfare institutions in the global north and south, with an intersectional focus on their
consequences for diverse groups. We will also explore how non‐state actors contribute to the construction
and maintenance of social safety nets around the world. Based on these insights, we will consider how
states, markets, families, and communities may shape the future of welfare states. 6 credits; SI, IS; Not
offered 2022‐23
POSC 372 Mansions and Shantytowns: Politics of the Spaces We Live In* This course explores theories
about spaces/places and investigates the impact of our physical environment on a broad range of social and
political issues. We will look at how parks, monuments, residential communities, and other features of our
cities and towns are made, who makes them, and in turn, their effects on our daily lives. Students will
engage with important contemporary issues such as residential segregation, public space management,
protest policing, etc. Most of the course will focus on urban politics, with a brief foray into rural issues. The
goal of this course is to encourage students to think about everyday environmental features in a more
systematic and theoretic manner and design social scientific inquiries into spatial issues. 6 credits; SI, IS;
Winter; Huan Gao
POSC 378 Political Economy & Ecology of Southeast Asia: Social Changes in Southeast Asia Informed by the
assigned readings, students will visit markets, factories, farms, and various cultural and natural sites to see
first‐hand the changes and challenges occurring in these areas. The course covers: (1) issues of livelihood
transition from rural to urban; (2) the interaction between market systems and social relations; and (3) the
impact on society of changes in physical infrastructures such as roads and telecommunication. Students will
keep a journal and produce three thematic short essays, a 15‐20‐minute video, or a well‐organized blog to
document their learning. 6 credits; SI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
POSC 379 Political Economy and Ecology of S.E. Asia: Diversity of Social Ecological Systems in Southeast Asia
Connecting the first and the second components, this course examines key actors, issues, and interests in
the political economy of and ecology of Southeast Asia. Students will connect economy to ecology in
Southeast Asia by connecting field experiences and observation to real data, facts, and cases that illustrate
the interaction between economy and ecology. This course requires students to identify a topic of interest
based on their field experience, research it using techniques taught in the field research and methods
course, and write a research report in the form of a term paper. 6 credits; SI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
POSC 380 Political Economy of China and Zomia* The role of China in world politics is the focus of this
course. We will study the relationship between China and Zomia (regions of Southeast, South, and Central
Asia), the South China Sea conflict, seaport and airport projects, gas‐pipelines, OBOR, the ZTE‐case, and
several Chinese‐led infrastructure projects. How is the Chinese model of political economic development
different from and similar to the neoliberal economic model? How do contemporary Chinese policy and
activities in Zomia, and around the world, explain the history and development of China’s centralized
political order from the Qing dynasty to modern China? 6 credits; SI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
POSC 400 Integrative Exercise 1‐6 credit; S/NC; Fall, Winter, Spring; Tun Myint, Barbara Allen, Christina E
Farhart, Laurence D Cooper, Dev Gupta, Greg G Marfleet, Mihaela Czobor‐Lupp, Huan Gao

353

Psychology
Psychology at Carleton provides a systematic approach to the study of behavior and experience. It
examines processes of physiological functioning, human and animal learning, human and animal
cognition, cognitive and social development, personality, social influence, and psychopathology,
and treats particular topics (e.g., prejudice, real-life decision making, and psychopharmacology) that
are representative of the diversity and complexity of psychology. It also strongly emphasizes the
development of analytic and expressive skills that are the basis of investigation, evaluation, and
communication in the field.
Psychology 110 is the basic introductory course in the department and is a prerequisite for all other
courses in psychology. Only in exceptional circumstances (e.g., an AP score of 4 or 5 or a higher
level IB score of 6 or 7) will a student be allowed to enroll in an upper-level psychology course
without having taken Psychology 110.
Majors are advised to plan their schedules carefully in light of the prerequisites listed for upperlevel courses in each area and the schedule of course offerings. A major in psychology prepares
students for graduate study toward an advanced research degree in psychology and for a variety of
professional programs and careers in psychological and social service areas. It also serves those
intending to pursue careers in law, medicine, education, and business.
Requirements for the Psychology Major
63 credits required for the major



6 credits: The introductory course, PSYC 110 or an AP score of 4 or 5 or a higher level IB exam score
of 6 or 7, and successful completion of a mid‐level course)
8 credits: The measurement and methods course and lab:
o PSYC 200 Measurement and Data Analysis in Psychology
o PSYC 201 Measurement and Data Analysis Lab
(ideally to be taken during the sophomore or junior year)



24 credits (courses cannot count in two groups):

o

o

6 credits from the Biological and Behavioral Processes group
 PSYC 210 Psychology of Learning and Memory
 PSYC 216 Behavioral Neuroscience
 PSYC 218 Hormones, Brain, and Behavior
 PSYC 220 Sensation and Perception
 PSYC 263 Sleep and Dreaming
 PSYC 267 Clinical Neuroscience (not offered in 2022‐23)
6 credits from the Cognitive Studies group
 CGSC 232 Cognitive Processes
 CGSC 236 Thinking, Reasoning, and Decision Making
 MUSC 227 Perception and Cognition of Music
 PSYC 220 Sensation and Perception
 PSYC 232 Cognitive Processes

354







PSYC 234 Psychology of Language
PSYC 238 Memory Processes (not offered in 2022‐23)
o 6 credits from the Social Behavior, Development and Personality group
 PSYC 244 Positive Psychology (not offered in 2022‐23)
 PSYC 246 Human Sexuality
 PSYC 248 Cross‐Cultural Psychology (not offered in 2022‐23)
 PSYC 250 Developmental Psychology (not offered in 2022‐23)
 PSYC 251 Lifespan Development
 PSYC 252 Personality
 PSYC 254 Psychopathology
 PSYC 256 Social Behavior and Interpersonal Processes
 PSYC 258 Social Cognition (not offered in 2022‐23)
 PSYC 260 Health Psychology (not offered in 2022‐23)
o 6 credits from any of the above courses listed in the groups
Two laboratory courses (in addition to PSYC 201) (4 credits):
o PSYC 211 Laboratory Research Methods in Learning and Memory
o PSYC 217 Laboratory Research Methods in Behavioral Neuroscience
o PSYC 219 Laboratory Research Methods in Hormones, Brain, and Behavior
o PSYC 221 Laboratory Research Methods in Sensation and Perception (not offered in 2022‐
23)
o PSYC 233 Laboratory Research Methods in Cognitive Processes
o PSYC 235 Psychology of Language Laboratory
o PSYC 253 Research Methods in Personality
o PSYC 257 Laboratory Research Methods in Social Behavior and Interpersonal Processes
o PSYC 259 Laboratory Research Methods in Social Cognition (not offered in 2022‐23)
o PSYC 261 Health Psychology Lab (not offered in 2022‐23)
Two upper‐level courses (12 credits):
o CGSC 382 Cognitive Development in Children and Adolescents
o PSYC 318 Psychopharmacology
o PSYC 354 Counseling Psychology
o PSYC 358 Cross‐Cultural Psychology Seminar in Prague: Psychopathology
o PSYC 365 Science and Pseudoscience in Psychology (not offered in 2022‐23)
o PSYC 366 Cognitive Neuroscience (not offered in 2022‐23)
o PSYC 367 Neuropsychology of Aging
o PSYC 370 Behavioral Neuroimmunology
o PSYC 371 Evolutionary and Developmental Trends in Cognition (not offered in 2022‐23)
o PSYC 373 Topics in Professional Psychology
o PSYC 375 Language and Deception (not offered in 2022‐23)
o PSYC 379 Child and Adolescent Psychiatry (not offered in 2022‐23)
o PSYC 382 Topics in Social and Personality: Endings (not offered in 2022‐23)
o PSYC 384 Psychology of Prejudice
o PSYC 386 Intervention Science: Using Psychology to Advance Social Good (not offered in
2022‐23)
only one of which may be PSYC 318, 354 or 358





The capstone seminar (6 credits):
o PSYC 358 Cross‐Cultural Psychology Seminar in Prague: Psychopathology
o PSYC 399 Capstone Seminar
The integrative exercise PSYC 400 (3 credits)

355

Particular courses in biology, education, linguistics, mathematics and computer science, economics,
philosophy, and sociology may also be recommended, depending on an individual's interests and
plans.
Majors will take the capstone seminar during the fall term of their senior year and their integrative
exercise during the winter term of their senior year.
Psychology Courses
PSYC 110 Principles of Psychology This course surveys major topics in psychology. We consider the
approaches different psychologists take to describe and explain behavior. We will consider a broad range of
topics, including how animals learn and remember contexts and behaviors, how personality develops and
influences functioning, how the nervous system is structured and how it supports mental events, how
knowledge of the nervous system may inform an understanding of conditions such as schizophrenia, how
people acquire, remember and process information, how psychopathology is diagnosed, explained, and
treated, how infants and children develop, and how people behave in groups and think about their social
environment. 6 credits; SI; Fall, Winter, Spring; Neil S Lutsky, Julie J Neiworth, Emily A Hazlett, Gisel G
Flores‐Montoya
PSYC 200 Measurement and Data Analysis in Psychology The course considers the role of measurement and
data analysis focused on behavioral sciences. Various forms of measurement and standards for the
evaluation of measures are explored. Students learn how to summarize, organize, and evaluate data using a
variety of techniques that are applicable to research in psychology and other disciplines. Among the
analyses discussed and applied are tests of means, various forms of analysis of variance, correlation and
regression, planned and post‐hoc comparisons, as well as various non‐parametric tests. Research design is
also explored. Prerequisite: Psychology 110, or Psychology/Cognitive Science 232/233, or instructor
consent; Concurrent registration in Psychology 201 required. 6 credits; FSR, QRE; Winter, Spring; Mitchell R
Campbell
PSYC 201 Measurement and Data Analysis Lab This lab course accompanies the lecture course, Psychology
200, and must be taken during the same term. The lab will provide an opportunity to explore lecture topics
more deeply, and in particular emphasize data collection and computational skills. Prerequisite: Psychology
110, or Psychology/Cognitive Science 232/233, or instructor permission. Concurrent registration in
Psychology 200 is required. 2 credits; QRE; Winter, Spring; Mitchell R Campbell
PSYC 210 Psychology of Learning and Memory A summary of theoretical approaches, historical influences
and contemporary research in the area of human and animal learning. The course provides a background in
classical, operant, and contemporary conditioning models, and these are applied to issues such as
behavioral therapy, drug addiction, decision‐making, education, and choice. It is recommended that
students enroll concurrently in Psychology 211. A grade of C‐ or better must be earned in both Psychology
210 and 211 to satisfy the LS requirement. Prerequisite: Psychology 110 or Neuroscience 127 or instructor
permission. 6 credits; WR2, QRE, LS; Winter; Julie J Neiworth
PSYC 211 Laboratory Research Methods in Learning and Memory This course accompanies Psychology 210.
Students will replicate classical studies and plan and conduct original empirical research projects in the
study of human and animal learning and memory. Psychology 211 requires concurrent or prior registration
in Psychology 210. A grade of C‐ or better must be earned in both Psychology 210 and 211 to satisfy the LS
requirement. Prerequisite: Psychology 110 or Neuroscience 127 or instructor permission; Concurrent
registration in Psychology 210. 2 credits; QRE, LS, WR2; Winter; Julie J Neiworth

356
PSYC 216 Behavioral Neuroscience An introduction to the physiological bases of complex behaviors in
mammals, with an emphasis on neural and hormonal mechanisms. A grade of C‐ or better must be earned
in both Psychology 216 and 217 to satisfy the LS requirement. Requires concurrent registration in
Psychology 217 Prerequisite: Concurrent registration in Psychology 217; Psychology 110. 6 credits; LS;
Spring; Lawrence J Wichlinski
PSYC 217 Laboratory Research Methods in Behavioral Neuroscience The course provides instruction and
experience in methods of behavioral neuroscience, the study of the inter‐relation of the brain (and
hormonal systems) and behavior. The focus of this laboratory will be on standard methods of inducing
behavioral changes via neural and hormonal manipulations in mammals. Psychology 217 requires
concurrent registration in Psychology 216. A grade of C‐ or better must be earned in both Psychology 216
and 217 to satisfy the LS requirement. Prerequisite: Concurrent registration in Psychology 216; Psychology
110. 2 credits; LS; Spring; Lawrence J Wichlinski
PSYC 218 Hormones, Brain, and Behavior In this course, students will learn about how hormones act in the
brain and the body to affect behaviors. This course draws heavily on biological psychology and students
learn about techniques in neuroendocrinology to better understand cellular function, neural circuits, and
the display of behaviors. Team‐based learning and case studies are used to explore the endocrine system,
sexual differentiation, the stress response, thirst and digestion, and reproductive behaviors. The
experimental evidence upon which our understanding of hormones, brain, and behavior is constructed is
emphasized. Enrollment in Psychology 219 is recommended. A grade of C‐ or better must be earned in both
Psychology 218 and 219 to satisfy the LS requirement. Prerequisite: Psychology 110 or instructor consent.
6 credits; NE, QRE; Winter; Sarah H Meerts
PSYC 219 Laboratory Research Methods in Hormones, Brain, and Behavior The laboratory in Hormones,
Brain and Behavior will consider the role of hormones in shaping the brain, the effect of experience on
hormone levels, and neuroendocrine factors in the display of hormones. Students will learn common
techniques in behavioral neuroendocrinology and will collect and analyze data. Psychology 219 requires
current or prior registraion in Psychology 218. A grade of C‐ or better must be earned in both Psychology
218 and 219 to satisfy the LS requirement. Prerequisite: Requires concurrent or prior registration in
Psychology 218. 2 credits; LS, WR2, QRE; Winter; Sarah H Meerts
PSYC 220 Sensation and Perception We will address the question of how humans acquire information from
the world to support action, learning, belief, choice, and the host of additional mental states that comprise
the subject matter of psychology. In other words "How do we get the outside inside?" We will initially
consider peripheral anatomical structures (e.g. the eye) and proceed through intermediate levels of sensory
coding and transmission to cover the brain regions associated with each of the major senses. Readings will
include primary sources and a text. In addition to exams and papers, students will conduct an investigation
into an area of personal interest. A grade of C‐ or better must be earned in both Psychology 220 and 221 to
satisfy the LS requirement. Prerequisite: Psychology 110 or instructor consent. 6 credits; LS; Spring; Julia F
Strand
PSYC 221 Laboratory Research Methods in Sensation and Perception This course accompanies Psychology
220. Students will replicate classical phenomena and plan and conduct original empirical research projects
in the study of human perceptual processes. Psychology 221 requires concurrent or prior registration in
Psychology 220. A grade of C‐ or better must be earned in both Psychology 220 and 221 to satisfy the LS
requirement. 2 credits; LS, QRE, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23

357
PSYC 232 Cognitive Processes Cross‐listed with CGSC 232. An introduction to the study of mental activity.
Topics include attention, pattern recognition and perception, memory, concept formation, categorization,
and cognitive development. Some attention is given to gender and individual differences in cognition, as
well as cultural settings for cognitive activities. A grade of C‐ or better must be earned in both PSYC/CGSC
232 and 233 to satisfy the LS requirement. Prerequisite: Psychology 110, Cognitive Science 100, Cognitive
Science 130 or permission of the instructor.; Requires concurrent registration in Psychology 233. 6 credits;
WR2, LS; Fall, Spring; Kathleen M Galotti
PSYC 233 Laboratory Research Methods in Cognitive Processes Cross‐listed with CGSC 233. Students will
participate in the replication and planning of empirical studies, collecting and analyzing data relevant to
major cognitive phenomena. A grade of C‐ or better must be earned in both to complete the LS
requirement Prerequisite: Psychology 232; Psychology 110, Cognitive Science 100, Cognitive Science 130 or
instructor permission. 2 credits; LS, QRE; Fall, Spring; Kathleen M Galotti
PSYC 234 Psychology of Language This course will cover a range of aspects of language use. We will spend
time discussing language production and comprehension, discourse processing, the relationship between
language and thought, and language acquisition. Additionally, we will touch on issues of memory,
perception, concepts, mental representation, and neuroscience. Throughout the course, we will emphasize
both the individual and social aspects of language as well as the dynamic and fluid nature of language use.
Concurrent registration in PSYC 235 is optional, but strongly recommended. A grade of C‐ or better must be
earned in both Psychology 234 and 235 to satisfy the LS requirement. Prerequisite: Psychology 110. 6
credits; LS; Spring; Mija M Van Der Wege
PSYC 235 Psychology of Language Laboratory This laboratory experience will expose students to a variety of
methodologies employed by researchers interested in studying language. Throughout the term, students
will both participate in experiments and conduct experiments. We will spend time discussing and
performing typical analyses. Finally, students will be expected to become proficient in writing their
experimental work in APA format and in presenting their research ideas in an oral format. Psychology 235
requires concurrent registration in Psychology 234. A grade of C‐ or better must be earned in both
Psychology 234 and 235 to satisfy the LS requirement. Prerequisite: Psychology 110 ; Concurrent
registration in Psychology 234. 2 credits; LS, QRE; Spring; Mija M Van Der Wege
PSYC 238 Memory Processes Memory is involved in nearly every human activity: We use our memory not
only when we reminisce about the past, but when we study for our exams, talk to our friends, and tie our
shoes. This course explores the psychological science of human memory. We will examine different types of
memory, how we encode new memories and retrieve old ones, how to ensure a memory is never
forgotten, and how to implant a false memory in someone else. In doing so we will look at both old and
new research, and discuss how memory research can be applied to some real world environments, such as
courtrooms and classrooms. By the end of the course you will be familiar with the major issues in the field
of memory research and be able to evaluate the quality of the studies used as evidence in these debates.
Prerequisite: Psychology 110. 6 credits; SI; Not offered 2022‐23
PSYC 244 Positive Psychology This course evaluates the effort to use the tools of psychological science to
understand the sources and nature of positive human strengths, characteristics, resources, and aspirations,
and to apply any knowledge gained to help individuals and institutions function more effectively.
Prerequisite: Psychology 110. 6 credits; SI; Not offered 2022‐23
PSYC 246 Human Sexuality Humans are a sexual animal. Not only do we engage in sexual behavior for
procreation, but also at times for pleasure, intimacy, affiliation, and profit. Furthermore, we maintain

358
sexual and gender identities that affect our behaviors and help us organize our social worlds. These
identities develop over time, through our childhood and adolescence and into adulthood. We also place
boundaries on sexuality and gender through norms, laws, and social conventions. Sexuality is at once
commonplace and private, ubiquitous yet taboo. In this course, we will explore the many dimensions and
paradoxes of human sexuality and its connection to our psychology. We will also consider these topics in
the context of real‐world phenomena and cross‐cultural examples. Prerequisite: Psychology 110 or
instructor consent. 6 credits; SI; Fall; Mitchell R Campbell
PSYC 248 Cross‐Cultural Psychology Do psychological principles apply universally or are they culture
specific? How does the exploration of psychological phenomena across cultures inform our understanding
of human behavior? This course examines major theoretical and empirical work in the field of Cross‐
Cultural Psychology. A major component will be on applied products, such as a web site containing 1) a
critical analysis of a particular cross cultural psychological phenomenon, and 2) an evidence‐based proposal
for improving cross cultural interaction. Prerequisite: Psychology 110. 6 credits; SI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
PSYC 250 Developmental Psychology An introduction to the concept of development, examining both
theoretical models and empirical evidence. Prenatal through late childhood is covered with some discussion
of adolescence when time permits. Topics include the development of personality and identity, social
behavior and knowledge, and cognition. In addition, attention is paid to current applications of theory to
such topics as: day care, the role of the media, and parenting. Prerequisite: Psychology 110 or instructor
permission. 6 credits; SI, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
PSYC 251 Lifespan Development This course explores the concepts, theories, and research on human
development as it occurs over the lifespan and across contexts. We will learn about physical, cognitive, and
psychosocial developmental milestones and challenges unique to each stage of human development. This
exploration “from womb to tomb” includes infancy, early and middle childhood, adolescence, emerging
adulthood, adulthood, and old age. Through readings, class discussions, and group and individual activities,
students will have the opportunity to apply the concepts we are learning to the world around us.
Prerequisite: Psychology 110 or equivalent. 6 credits; SI; Fall; Emily A Hazlett
PSYC 252 Personality An examination of analytic models that attempt to characterize and explain aspects of
behavior, thought, and emotion that are central to our conceptions of ourselves as distinctly human beings
and as individuals. Original theoretical statements and relevant empirical literature will be consulted. A
grade of C‐ or better must be earned in both Psychology 252 and 253 to satisfy the LS requirement.
Prerequisite: Psychology 110 or consent of the instructor. 6 credits; LS; Winter; Neil S Lutsky
PSYC 253 Research Methods in Personality A laboratory to undertake research on topics in personality.
Requires concurrent registration in Psychology 252. A grade of C‐ or better must be earned in both
Psychology 252 and 253 to satisfy the LS requirement. Prerequisite: Psychology 110. 2 credits; LS, QRE;
Winter; Neil S Lutsky
PSYC 254 Psychopathology This course will focus on causal factors and clinical presentations of mental
disorders, such as mood disorders, anxiety disorders, eating disorders, dissociative disorders, and psychotic
disorders, among others. We will use an integrative approach that incorporates psychological, biological,
interpersonal, and sociocultural perspectives. Methods of assessment and treatment will also at times be
discussed. Prerequisite: Psychology 110 or instructor permission. 6 credits; SI; Winter, Spring; Ken B Abrams
PSYC 256 Social Behavior and Interpersonal Processes The social psychological analysis of human social
behavior, interpersonal processes, and group influences. Concurrent registration in Psychology 257 is

359
optional, but strongly recommended. A grade of C‐ or better must be earned in both Psychology 256 and
257 to satisfy the LS requirement. Prerequisite: Psychology 110. 6 credits; LS; Spring; Sharon A Akimoto
PSYC 257 Laboratory Research Methods in Social Behavior and Interpersonal Processes Students will
participate in the planning and replication of empirical studies of the social psychology of social behavior.
Requires concurrent registration in Psychology 256. A grade of C‐ or better must be earned in both
Psychology 256 and 257 to satisfy the LS requirement. Prerequisite: Psychology 110. 2 credits; LS, QRE;
Spring; Sharon A Akimoto
PSYC 258 Social Cognition This course will focus on a social psychological analysis of social cognition,
perception and judgment. It includes the examination of attitudes, stereotyping, attribution and the self.
Concurrent registration in Psychology 259 is strongly suggested. A grade of C‐ or better must be earned in
both Psychology 258 and 259 to satisfy the LS requirement. Prerequisite: Psychology 110 or permission of
the instructor. 6 credits; LS; Not offered 2022‐23
PSYC 259 Laboratory Research Methods in Social Cognition Students will participate in the design and
replication of social psychological studies related to social cognition. Requires concurrent registration in
Psychology 258. A grade of C‐ or better must be earned in both Psychology 258 and 259 to satisfy the LS
requirement. Prerequisite: Psychology 110 or instructor permission. 2 credits; LS, QRE; Not offered 2022‐23
PSYC 260 Health Psychology This course will examine how psychological principles can be employed to
promote and maintain health, prevent and treat illness, and encourage adherence to disease treatment
regimens. Within a biopsychosocial framework, we will analyze behavioral patterns and public policies that
influence risk for cardiovascular disease, cancer, chronic pain, substance abuse, and sexually transmitted
diseases, among other conditions. Additionally, students in groups will critically examine the effects of local
policies on health outcomes and propose policy changes supported by theory and research. A grade of C‐ or
better must be earned in both Psychology 260 and 261 to satisfy the LS requirement. Prerequisite:
Psychology 110. 6 credits; LS, QRE; Not offered 2022‐23
PSYC 261 Health Psychology Lab This course provides students with direct experience applying principles of
health psychology. Students will engage in a term‐long self‐directed project aimed at increasing the
frequency of a healthy behavior (such as exercising) or decreasing the frequency of an unhealthy behavior
(such as smoking). Additionally, we will read and discuss case studies that relate to the current topic in the
lecture portion of the course. Requires concurrent registration in Psychology 260. A grade of C‐ or better
must be earned in both Psychology 260 and 261 to satisfy the LS requirement. Prerequisite: Concurrent
registration in Psychology 260. 2 credits; QRE, LS; Not offered 2022‐23
PSYC 263 Sleep and Dreaming This course will examine recent experimental findings and current
perspectives on sleep, dreaming, sleep disorders, and states of consciousness. Prerequisite: Psychology
110. 6 credits; SI; Fall; Lawrence J Wichlinski
PSYC 267 Clinical Neuroscience This course will explore brain disorders with significant psychological
manifestations, such as Alzheimer's disease, anxiety, depression, schizophrenia, and substance abuse,
among others. Students will also receive a foundation in brain anatomy, physiology, and chemistry so that
they may better understand the biological correlates of these clinical conditions. Prerequisite: Psychology
110. 6 credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐23
PSYC 290 Cross‐Cultural Seminar in Prague: Directed Reading 2 credits; S/CR/NC; Fall; Ken B Abrams

360
PSYC 300 Special Topics in Psychological Research This course is a hands‐on empirical research seminar
related to a faculty member’s research program. Students are expected to collect and analyze data, read
primary literature, meet regularly with the faculty supervisor, and submit a final paper. Prerequisite:
Psychology 110 or instructor permission. 1‐6 credit; NE; Fall; Sarah H Meerts
PSYC 318 Psychopharmacology This course will cover the major categories of drugs that possess
psychoactive properties, with an emphasis on their effects on the nervous system. In addition, drug use and
abuse in a larger societal context will be examined. Prerequisite: Psychology 216 or instructor permission. 6
credits; SI; Winter; Lawrence J Wichlinski
PSYC 354 Counseling Psychology An introduction to theories, research, techniques, and issues in the field of
counseling psychology. Prerequisite: Psychology 110 or instructor permission. Psychology 252 is
recommended. 6 credits; SI; Fall, Spring; Steven F Kozberg
PSYC 358 Cross‐Cultural Psychology Seminar in Prague: Psychopathology In the West mental illness has
traditionally been approached with a biomedical model that views it as independent of culture. By contrast
the "relativist" position assumes that, to a large extent, human behaviors are culturally determined and
that the etiology and manifestation of mental disorders are affected by society and culture. This course will
address such issues as well as their implications for assessment and treatment through an examination of
several Western and non‐Western societies, with a special emphasis on Czech society. There will be several
guest lectures by Czech psychology professors as well as excursions within Prague to psychiatric hospitals
and clinics, where students will meet with Czech clinicians and patients. Prerequisite: Acceptance in Cross‐
Cultural Studies in Prague program. 6 credits; SI, IS; Fall; Ken B Abrams
PSYC 365 Science and Pseudoscience in Psychology In this seminar we will explore the differences between
scientific and pseudoscientific approaches to the study of human behavior. Common characteristics of
pseudoscientific approaches as well as tools for critically evaluating claims to knowledge will be identified.
Topics covered will include controversial assessment techniques (astrology, hypnosis), treatments for
psychological conditions (homeopathy, facilitated communication), treatments for medical conditions
(psychic surgery, faith healing), and paranormal phenomena (extrasensory perception, UFO abductions).
Students will be encouraged to maintain a healthy degree of skepticism toward controversial claims and
utilize a high standard of evidence before accepting them. Prerequisite: Psychology 110 or consent of the
instructor. 6 credits; SI; Not offered 2022‐23
PSYC 366 Cognitive Neuroscience It should be obvious that every process that goes on in the mind has
physiological underpinnings. But, whether we can unlock the secrets of learning, memory, perception,
language, decision‐making, emotional responding, empathy, morality, social thinking, deception, and
manipulation as they are supported by neurons and neural connections is a longstanding and elusive
problem in psychology. Contemporary primary source articles are mostly used for this discussion‐driven
course, but a brief textbook/manual on brain processing is also required. The student should leave the class
with a working understanding of brain processes and of contemporary theories of brain processes that may
support many mental processes in humans. Prerequisite: Psychology 110 or Biology 125 or Psychology 216
or Neuroscience 127 or permission of the instructor. 6 credits; SI, QRE; Not offered 2022‐23
PSYC 367 Neuropsychology of Aging With the aging population comes a variety of challenges, including
those to cognitive health and decline. Neurodegenerative diseases create various forms of dementia and
cause unique problems beyond those that are an outcome of healthy aging. The disabling effects of aging
and dementia extend beyond the person to family, friends and wider community. The need to understand
and extend knowledge of both healthy aging and the pathological changes that occur with

361
neurodegenerative diseases with aging is of great importance. By understanding how the brain is impacted
by age, dementia, and other clinical syndromes, both management of the cognitive issues and advances in
treatments to improve mental functioning can be made. This course takes a neuropsychological approach
to study healthy aging and neurodegenerative disease. In this seminar, lectures and discussions explore the
cognitive, behavioral, and molecular aspects of healthy aging and neurodegenerative disease processes in
humans. Cognitive topics include working memory, long term memory, attention, familiarity and
recollection, emotion, and social factors that interact with aging. The physiological and cognitive outcomes
of neurodegenerative conditions such as Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease, and various types of
dementia are compared with the physiology and cognitive decline evident in healthy aging. Students will
read primary articles on these topics, and propose a project based on course discussion and interactions
with people at senior centers and convalescent centers in Northfield. Prerequisite: Neuroscience 127 or
Psychology 216 or Psychology 110 or instructor permission. 6 credits; SI; Fall; Julie J Neiworth
PSYC 370 Behavioral Neuroimmunology The immune system directly influences the central nervous system
and behavior during both health and disease. The course will have an emphasis on animal behavior (e.g.
memory and sociability assays) and techniques in neuroimmunology that range from genetic engineering
(e.g. CRISPR and DREADD) to immune cell function, detection of surface receptors, and protein expression
(e.g. flow cytometry, confocal microscopy, immune cell migration assays, ELISA, and western blot.) The
topics that will be covered range from how cytokines influence behavior to effects of gut microbiota in
brain function and behavior. This course will primarily use empirical research that will help you develop a
deeper understanding of molecular techniques, cell biology, and develop strong analytical skills of biological
findings in immunology and its connection with animal behavior. Prerequisite: Neuroscience 127 or
Psychology 216 recommended or instructor permission. 6 credits; WR2, QRE, NE; Spring; Gisel G Flores‐
Montoya
PSYC 371 Evolutionary and Developmental Trends in Cognition Recent findings have brought to light some
very compelling examples of humanlike cognition in nonhuman primates: tool use and tool making, family
bonding, complex social behaviors such as cooperation, altruism, communication, and emotion. The study
of infant cognition has also revealed more complex cognitive abilities in developing humans. Each of these
topics is considered in the context of the cognitive workings of the primate mind, with emphasis on apes
(gorilla, chimpanzee), monkeys (particularly cebus and rhesus varieties) and human children. The goal is to
evaluate the uniqueness of primate cognition, both human and nonhuman. Prerequisite: Psychology 110 or
Biology 126 or Psychology 216 or instructor permission. 6 credits; SI, QRE; Not offered 2022‐23
PSYC 373 Topics in Professional Psychology This seminar will examine topics in professional psychology,
including professional standards, assessment, case formulation, evidence‐based treatments,
interdisciplinary issues, and selected mental disorders. Prerequisite: Psychology 110 or permission of the
instructor, Psychology 254 or Psychology 354. 6 credits; SI; Spring; Steven F Kozberg
PSYC 375 Language and Deception In this course we will examine deception and persuasion in language
use. We will take up three main issues. The first is what it means to deceive and how people deceive others
through language. What methods do they use, and how do these methods work? The second issue is why
people deceive. What purposes do their deceptions serve in court, in advertising, in bureaucracies, in
business transactions, and in everyday face‐to‐face conversation? The third issue is the ethics of deception.
Is it legitimate to deceive others, and if so, when and why? Prerequisite: Psychology 232, 234, 238 or
Cognitive Science 236. 6 credits; SI, QRE; Not offered 2022‐23
PSYC 379 Child and Adolescent Psychiatry This seminar will focus on the biological and psychological
components of psychiatric disorders in children and adolescents. We will also address the possible causes

362
of these disorders, and examine some current controversies surrounding diagnosis and treatment.
Prerequisite: Psychology 110. 6 credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐23
PSYC 382 Topics in Social and Personality: Endings This seminar will examine the psychology of endings,
including endings associated with psychotherapy, social interactions, personal relationships, social roles,
literature and the arts, and life itself. We will address when and how endings occur, how we experience
endings, and what makes an ending a good or poor one, among other issues. Prerequisite: Psychology 252,
256, 258, or instructor permission. 6 credits; SI; Not offered 2022‐23
PSYC 384 Psychology of Prejudice This seminar introduces students to major psychological theories and
research on the development, perpetuation and reduction of prejudice. A social and historical approach to
race, culture, ethnicity and race relations will provide a backdrop for examining psychological theory and
research on prejudice formation and reduction. Major areas to be discussed are cognitive social learning,
group conflict and contact hypothesis. Prerequisite: Psychology 110 or instructor permission. Psychology
256 or 258 recommended. 6 credits; SI, IDS; Winter; Sharon A Akimoto
PSYC 386 Intervention Science: Using Psychology to Advance Social Good Many of the most pressing issues
facing our world today, including prejudice/discrimination, climate change, health, conflict, and
polarization/radicalization, ultimately stem from human behavior. As a science centrally focused on human
behavior, psychology is well‐poised to contribute meaningfully to developing solutions to these and other
issues. In this class, we will review the rapidly expanding literature on intervention science, which involves
employing psychological concepts and principles to change real‐world outcomes. We will also study
relevant behavioral science and motivational theories, as well as examining how findings from the lab can
be translated to real‐world applications. Students will also complete a final project that will involve
conducting their own intervention experiment in the field. Students will leave the class equipped to use
their knowledge of behavioral science to effect change in the real world to address the issues they care
about. Prerequisite: Psychology 110 or instructor consent. 6 credits; SI; Not offered 2022‐23
PSYC 399 Capstone Seminar Each of the three capstone seminars focus on a topic of interest to students in
psychology. The goals of the course are to consider questions on a selected topic through reading primary
research and discussion and review skills pertinent to scholarly investigation within the topic. Students are
then mentored through a substantial paper related to the seminar topic. Prerequisite: Several 200‐level
Psychology courses and senior Psychology major. 6 credits; NE; Fall; Lawrence J Wichlinski, Julia F Strand,
Mitchell R Campbell
PSYC 400 Integrative Exercise Students independently revise and extend the fall term paper, integrating the
feedback from their faculty advisor. Based on this work, students submit a final comps paper (approx. 20
pages) that makes original contributions to the field of psychology through critiquing existing psychology
primary sources, applying empirically‐supported psychological theories to new questions, generating
potential applied guidelines, and/or proposing new theories or empirical studies based on published
theories and empirical research. Prerequisite: Psychology 399. 3 credits; S/NC; Winter, Spring; Lawrence J
Wichlinski, Julia F Strand, Mitchell R Campbell, Julie J Neiworth, Ken B Abrams

Other Courses Pertinent to Psychology



CGSC 232 Cognitive Processes
CGSC 236 Thinking, Reasoning, and Decision Making

363






CGSC 386 Adolescent Cognitive Development: Developing an Identity and Life Plans (not offered in
2022‐23)
ECON 267 Behavioral Economics
EDUC 234 Educational Psychology
MUSC 227 Perception and Cognition of Music
PE 332 Foundations of Sport Psychology and Performance Mentality

Public Policy Minor
The public policy minor provides a grounding in public service values that underscore the ethical
pursuit of the public interest with accountability, competence, efficiency, objectivity, respect,
equity, and fairness. The minor seeks to serve students who wish to complement their training as
liberal arts scholars with these public service values and competencies.
The public policy minor may be paired with any existing major at Carleton. No political scienceeconomics double majors may add the public policy minor. Other double majors ought to discuss
their plans with the director.
No more than four courses may be taken in the same department or program. Any course taken for
the core cannot be applied towards the electives requirement.
Public Policy Minor Requirements
Minor Requirements: 48 credits (8 courses)
Required Courses (36 credits, 6 courses):


Economics Core (18 credits)
o ECON 110 Principles of Macroeconomics
o ECON 111 Principles of Microeconomics
o ECON 270 Economics of the Public Sector



Statistical Methods (6 credits)
o STAT 120 (formerly MATH 215) or SOAN 239

In cases in which students have AP Statistics credit, they are required to take one of the following
additional methods or statistics courses with an applied focus: ECON 329, STAT 230 (formerly
MATH 245) POSC 230, SOAN 240 or PSYC 200. Students with more advanced statistics training
may substitute another course with the director's approval.


Gateway Course (6 credits)
o POSC 265 Public Policy and Global Capitalism



Ethics (6 credits)

o



ENTS 215 Environmental Ethics (not offered in 2022‐23)
PHIL 213 Ethics

364








PHIL 221 Philosophy of Law (not offered in 2022‐23)
PHIL 222 Topics in Medical Ethics (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 213 Religion, Medicine, and Healing
RELG 219 Religious Law, Il/Legal Religions (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 269 Food, Justice and Nonviolence: Hindu, Buddhist, and Jain Perspectives
RELG 270 Philosophy of Religion (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 274 Religion and Biomedical Ethics (not offered in 2022‐23)

Electives (12 credits, 2 courses):
At least one of the electives courses must be designated as including "advanced work." All 300level courses represent advanced work. Some 200-level courses may be designated as representing
advanced work or the director and the relevant department or professor may define a course for a
particular student as advanced work. Normally, advanced work includes independent research or
project-based learning beyond the classroom, including community-engaged work.
The electives are listed under the following "clusters." Both courses may be taken in the same
cluster or they may be divided between clusters.


Economic Policy-Making and Development
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o



Public Health
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o



ECON 240 Microeconomics of Development
ECON 241 Growth and Development
ECON 268 Economics of Cost Benefit Analysis (not offered in 2022‐23)
ECON 274 Labor Economics (not offered in 2022‐23)
ECON 275 Law and Economics
POSC 209 Money and Politics (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 266 Urban Political Economy (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 361 Approaches to Development*
POSC 366 Urban Political Economy* (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 227 Liberation Theologies (not offered in 2022‐23)

BIOL 234 Microbiology (not offered in 2022‐23)
BIOL 240 Genetics
BIOL 310 Immunology
BIOL 338 Genomics and Bioinformatics
BIOL 370 Seminar: Selected Topics in Virology
ECON 264 Health Care Economics
IDSC 235 Perspectives in Public Health (not offered in 2022‐23)
PHIL 222 Topics in Medical Ethics (not offered in 2022‐23)
PSYC 260 Health Psychology (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 233 Gender and Power in the Catholic Church
SOAN 262 Anthropology of Health and Illness

Environmental Policy and Sustainability
o
o
o
o

BIOL 210 Global Change Biology
BIOL 338 Genomics and Bioinformatics
ECON 271 Economics of Natural Resources and the Environment
ENTS 210 Environmental Justice

365
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o


Social Policy and Welfare
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o



ECON 257 Economics of Gender
HIST 239 Hunger, Public Policy and Food Provision in History (not offered in 2022‐23)
PHIL 232 Social and Political Philosophy (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 253 Welfare Capitalisms in Post‐War Europe
POSC 257 Marxist Political Thought
POSC 273 Race and Politics in the U.S.
POSC 274 Globalization, Pandemics, and Human Security (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 289 Global Religions in Minnesota (not offered in 2022‐23)
SOAN 206 Critical Perspectives on Work in the Twenty‐first Century (not offered in 2022‐
23)
SOAN 252 Growing up in an Aging Society
SOAN 272 Sociological Perspectives on Race and Ethnicity in the United States (not offered
in 2022‐23)
SOAN 288 Diversity, Democracy, Inequality in America (not offered in 2022‐23)
SOAN 310 Sociology of Mass Incarceration
SOAN 314 Contemporary Issues in Critical Criminology (not offered in 2022‐23)
SOAN 325 Sociology of Adoption and Assisted Reproduction (not offered in 2022‐23)

Education Policy
o
o
o
o
o
o



ENTS 212 Global Food Systems
ENTS 215 Environmental Ethics (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENTS 244 Biodiversity Conservation and Development
ENTS 288 Abrupt Climate Change (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENTS 289 Climate Change and Human Health
ENTS 307 Wilderness Field Studies: Grand Canyon (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENTS 310 Topics in Environmental Law and Policy (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 205 American Environmental History
HIST 306 American Wilderness (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 308 American Cities and Nature
POSC 268 Global Environmental Politics and Policy
POSC 333 Global Social Changes and Sustainability* (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 243 Native American Religious Freedom
SOAN 203 Anthropology of Good Intentions (not offered in 2022‐23)
SOAN 323 Mother Earth: Women, Development and the Environment (not offered in 2022‐
23)
SOAN 333 Environmental Anthropology (not offered in 2022‐23)

EDUC 225 Issues in Urban Education
EDUC 245 The History of American School Reform (not offered in 2022‐23)
EDUC 250 Fixing Schools: Politics and Policy in American Education (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 203 American Indian Education (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 218 Schools, Scholarship and Policy in the United States (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 313 Legal Issues in Higher Education

Foreign Policy and Security
o
o
o
o

POSC 231 American Foreign Policy (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 236 Global, National and Human Security (not offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 282 Terrorism and Counterterrorism
POSC 285 The U.S. Intelligence Community

366
o
o
o


Other Comparative Public Policy Courses
o
o
o
o



POSC 328 Foreign Policy Analysis*
RELG 264 Islamic Politics (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 329 Modernity and Tradition

POSC 203 Political Communication: Political Advertising in Elections and Public Policy (not
offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 303 Political Communication: Political Advertising in Elections and Public Policy* (not
offered in 2022‐23)
POSC 330 The Complexity of Politics* (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 249 Religion and American Public Life (not offered in 2022‐23)

Off‐Campus Programs at Carleton
o ECON Microeconomic Development in Bangladesh (winter‐break program
o ENTS Ethiopia and Tanzania Program
o HIST Wilderness Studies at the Grand Canyon (spring‐break program)
o POSC Washington D.C. Program
o POSC Political Economy and Ecology of Southeast Asia
o IDSC Public Health in Practice: Washington, D.C. and the Twin Cities (winter‐break program)

The OCS office and the Director of the minor can recommend other public policy-relevant offcampus programs. Application of courses from these programs to the minor must be approved by
the director.
Recommended Additional Work
Students wishing to build further on their public policy training may pursue, with the support of the
director or designated adviser, additional recommended work. Many of these opportunities will be
listed on the webpage for the minor, but these and others will be available through civic engagement
projects (ACE), the Center for Community and Civic Engagement office, and the Career Center.
The webpage of the minor and the director of the minor will maintain current information on
recommended public policy internships.

Religion
The study of religion, in the context of a liberal arts education, draws upon multiple disciplines in the
humanities and the social sciences. This is reflected in the variety of courses offered within the department:
some introduce a religious tradition and trace its development historically; others examine in a cross‐
cultural context the issues faced by various religious communities and individuals; and still others explore
and compare diverse theories and methods employed in the study of religions. The department is
concerned with traditional and contemporary forms of both major and more marginal religions, and with
both "elite" and "popular" forms of religious expression. We examine the existential, intellectual, and social
problems to which religions respond, and probe the dynamic and often ambiguous relationship between
religious beliefs and practices and the social order in which they are embedded. Throughout the curriculum,
religion is approached as a significant and pervasive expression of human culture, both in the past and the
present.

367

Requirements for the Religion Major
69 credits earned through courses in the department, and in “Religion Pertinent” courses offered by
other departments, and in select courses from off-campus study programs.
Required courses:






RELG 110 Understanding Religion, ordinarily taken by end of fall of the junior year
RELG 300 Theories and Methods in the Study of Religion, winter term of the junior year
RELG 399 Senior Research Seminar, winter term of the senior year
RELG 400 Integrative Exercise 3 credits, spring term of the senior year
12 credits of 300‐level seminars except RELG 300, 359 or 399



Breadth requirement
o Two 100‐level survey courses numbered between 120‐170



Depth requirement
o A minimum of two courses (12 credits) that are focused on the same tradition or region of
the world

Other notes:
Religion 100s (A & I Seminars) count toward the religion major
No cap on number of Religion Pertinent courses from other departments that can count toward the
religion major
Courses taken for the depth and breadth requirements can be double-dipped and such courses could
also be used for another requirement in the major if applicable.

Religion Minor
The religion minor offers students a flexible and broad exposure to the discipline, emphasizing the
diversity of religious practices and understandings, both within and among religious traditions,
while providing opportunities to master theoretical tools and to apply these in the detailed study of
specific themes or traditions. These skills and perspectives enhance academic work in majors across
the college and in numerous career paths after college. Whether entering fields related to public
policy, health care, nonprofit advocacy and service, education, law, or more, a religion minor can
nurture habits of mind and competencies that enable students to be professionals with a unique
understanding of religion as a pervasive, significant, and complex dimension of human life.
To earn a Religion minor, students must complete at least 36 credits, distributed as follows:


Introductory Level (courses introducing the diversity within and among religious traditions) 6
credits:
o RELG 100 (Any of the Religion A&I Seminars)
o RELG 110 Understanding Religion

368
o


Any of the department's regular 100‐level courses

Method and Theory (courses providing theoretical grounding in the study of religion) 6 or 12
credits at the 300‐level Religion courses. Either
o RELG 300 Theories and Methods or
o 12 credits of 300‐level Religion seminar

It cannot, however, be fulfilled by RELG 399 (the senior comps seminar) or RELG 359 (an
off-campus studies course for Buddhist Studies in Bodh Gaya).


Electives (courses exploring traditions, interdisciplinary themes, problems, and puzzles in the study
of religion). 24 or 18 credits of any combination of 100‐, 200‐, or 300‐level Religion courses.

o

A maximum of 6 credits may be taken outside of the Religion Department. Such courses
may be:
o



Religion‐pertinent courses in other departments
Off‐Campus Studies (OCS) courses. For an OCS course to count for the minor,
students must submit a petition and the course’s syllabus.

Religion Courses
RELG 100 American Pilgrimages Road Trip! This seminar explores religious and spiritual journeys toward
sacred centers in American culture and the transformation and reorientation that often happens along the
way for pilgrims of diverse American communities. Topics include Native American spatial practices in the
Southwest, the figure of the "Pilgrim" in colonial New England and the invention of American origins,
Marian apparitions and devotion to the Virgin of Guadalupe, African American journeys to Mecca and
Africa, evangelical pilgrimages to Israel, spiritual tourism in National Parks, and the American road trip. 6
credits; AI, WR1, IDS; Fall; Michael D McNally
RELG 100 Buddhism, Science, Society This course will examine Buddhism’s engagement with the modern
world in global and local contexts from Asia to North America. How do Buddhists draw on the resources of
their tradition to change the social structures of gender, class, and race without invalidating that tradition?
How do Buddhist teachings provide tools to combat and reinforce racism and violence while empowering
and oppressing individuals? Do the Buddhist and scientific views of the mind agree or disagree? Can the
effects of meditation be scientifically explained? In exploring these questions, students will be introduced
to the multiplicity of Buddhisms. 6 credits; AI, WR1, IS; Fall; Asuka Sango
RELG 110 Understanding Religion How can we best understand the role of religion in the world today, and
how should we interpret the meaning of religious traditions‐‐their texts and practices‐‐in history and
culture? This class takes an exciting tour through selected themes and puzzles related to the fascinating and
diverse expressions of religion throughout the world. From politics and pop culture, to religious
philosophies and spiritual practices, to rituals, scriptures, gender, religious authority, and more, students
will explore how these issues emerge in a variety of religions, places, and historical moments in the U.S. and
across the globe. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IDS; Fall, Winter, Spring; Kristin C Bloomer, Sonja G Anderson, Michael
D McNally
RELG 111 Introduction to the Qu’ran This course aims to introduce students to the Qur’an as the sacred
text of Islam. It assumes no background in Islamic Studies nor does it introduce students to the religion of
Islam. Rather it familiarizes students with one of the most widely read, dynamic, and influential texts in

369
human history. Topics in the course include the history of the Qur’an and its codex, the Qur’an’s literary
style and structure, its references to other religions, its commentarial tradition, and its roles and
significance in Muslims’ devotional, social, and political lives. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IS; Fall; Kambiz
GhaneaBassiri
RELG 120 Introduction to Judaism What is Judaism? Who are Jewish people? What are Jewish texts,
practices, ideas? What ripples have Jewish people, texts, practices, and ideas caused beyond their sphere?
These questions will animate our study as we touch on specific points in over three millennia of history. We
will immerse ourselves in Jewish texts, historic events, and cultural moments, trying to understand them on
their own terms. At the same time, we will analyze them using key concepts such as ‘tradition,’ ‘culture,’
‘power,’ and ‘diaspora.’ We will explore how ‘Jewishness’ has been constructed by different stakeholders,
each claiming the authority to define it. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IS, QRE; Not offered 2022‐23
RELG 121 Introduction to Christianity This course will trace the history of Christianity from its origins in the
villages of Palestine, to its emergence as the official religion of the Roman Empire, and through its evolution
and expansion as the world's largest religion. The course will focus on events, persons, and ideas that have
had the greatest impact on the history of Christianity, and examine how this tradition has evolved in
different ways in response to different needs, cultures, and tensions‐‐political and otherwise‐‐around the
world. This is an introductory course. No familiarity with the Bible, Christianity, or the academic study of
religion is presupposed. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IS; Spring; Lori K Pearson
RELG 122 Introduction to Islam This course is a general introduction to Islam as a prophetic religious
tradition. It explores the different ways Muslims have interpreted and put into practice the prophetic
message of Muhammad through analyses of varying theological, legal, political, mystical, and literary
writings as well as through Muslims’ lived histories. These analyses aim for students to develop a
framework for explaining the sources and vocabularies through which historically specific human
experiences and understandings of the world have been signified as Islamic. The course will focus primarily
on the early and modern periods of Islamic history. 6 credits; HI, IS, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
RELG 130 Native American Religions This course explores the history and contemporary practice of Native
American religious traditions, especially as they have developed amid colonization and resistance. While
surveying a broad variety of ways that Native American traditions imagine land, community, and the
sacred, the course focuses on the local traditions of the Ojibwe and Lakota communities. Materials include
traditional beliefs and practices, the history of missions, intertribal new religious movements, and
contemporary issues of treaty rights, religious freedom, and the revitalization of language and culture. 6
credits; HI, WR2, IDS; Winter; Michael D McNally
RELG 140 Religion and American Culture This course explores the colorful, contested history of religion in
American culture. While surveying the main contours of religion in the United States from the colonial era
to the present, the course concentrates on a series of historical moments that reveal tensions between a
quest for a (Protestant) American consensus and an abiding religious and cultural pluralism. 6 credits; HI,
WR2, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
RELG 152 Religions in Japanese Culture An introduction to the major religious traditions of Japan, from
earliest times to the present. Combining thematic and historical approaches, this course will scrutinize both
defining characteristics of, and interactions among, various religious traditions, including worship of the
kami (local deities), Buddhism, shamanistic practices, Christianity, and new religious movements. We also
will discuss issues crucial in the study of religion, such as the relation between religion and violence,
gender, modernity, nationalism and war. 6 credits; HI, IS, WR2, QRE; Fall; Asuka Sango

370
RELG 153 Introduction to Buddhism This course offers a survey of Buddhism from its inception in India
some 2500 years ago to the present. We first address fundamental Buddhist ideas and practices, then their
elaboration in the Mahayana and tantric movements, which emerged in the first millennium CE in India. We
also consider the diffusion of Buddhism throughout Asia and to the West. Attention will be given to both
continuity and diversity within Buddhism‐‐to its commonalities and transformations in specific historical
and cultural settings. We also will address philosophical, social, political, and ethical problems that are
debated among Buddhists and scholars of Buddhism today. 6 credits; HI, IS, WR2; Winter; Jonathan H
Dickstein
RELG 155 Hinduism: An Introduction Hinduism is the world's third‐largest religion (or, as some prefer, “way
of life”), with about 1.2 billion followers. It is also one of its oldest, with roots dating back at least 3500
years. “Hinduism,” however, is a loosely defined, even contested term, designating the wide variety of
beliefs and practices of the majority of the people of South Asia. This survey course introduces students to
this great variety, including social structures (such as the caste system), rituals and scriptures, mythologies
and epics, philosophies, life practices, politics, poetry, sex, gender, Bollywood, and—lest we forget—some
330 million gods and goddesses. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IS; Spring; Kristin C Bloomer
RELG 161 The Jewish Bible This course explores the text known to scholars as the "Hebrew Bible," to Jews
as the "Tanakh," and to Christians as the "Old Testament." Composed, compiled, and redacted over a
millennium, the Bible is a remarkably complex document that affords its readers the opportunity to
ruminate on questions of divinity and humanity, judgment and redemption, slavery and bondage, history
and memory, life and death. Through examining the contents and historical contexts of the Bible's
constituent parts, we will gain insight into how ancient and modern writers, readers, and thinkers dealt
with these same questions. Requires no previous knowledge and will use sources in translation. 6 credits;
HI, WR2, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
RELG 162 Jesus, the Bible, and Christian Beginnings Who was Jesus? What’s in the Bible? How did
Christianity begin? This course is an introduction to the oldest Christian documents we have (27 books in
the New Testament) as well as several ancient texts that did not become part of the Bible. We will study
this literature critically and historically by situating it within its ancient Jewish, Greco‐Roman context, but
we will also learn about the different ways modern readers have interpreted it. As we work our way
through the texts, we will pay special attention to three topics of enduring debate and political significance
in the history of biblical interpretation: (1) suffering, liberation, and empire; (2) antisemitism, and (3)
gender, sexuality, and marriage. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
RELG 210 The Arts of Islam This course focuses on arts in different shapes and forms created by artists and
artisans influenced by Islamic thought and culture across different times and places. The goal is to raise
questions about the aesthetics, praxis, and politics of art and the possibilities it offers for navigating,
negotiating with, and responding to local and global dynamics. We will look at a diverse range of artistic
productions, including photographs in the museums of New York, illustrated fourteenth‐century
manuscripts of a wine‐drinking ceremony in Herat, and graffiti on the streets of Cairo during the Arab
spring. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
RELG 211 Race and Religion: Slavery, Colonialism, and their Afterlives This course examines the emergence
and entanglement of “race” and “religion” as categories, especially in relation to slavery and colonialism,
and with regard to the study of Islam as well as other traditions. By touching on themes in postcolonial
theory, psychoanalysis, black liberation theology, and decolonial studies, we will ask questions such as:
What is the relation between the invention of the “infidel” and the invention of the “negro”? How did the
classification of non‐Christians by missionaries help shape the emergence of racial “science”? Is the

371
construction of the “enemy combatant” in our contemporary age of terror informed by the fifteenth
century classification of natives as “savages”? 6 credits; HI, WR2, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
RELG 213 Religion, Medicine, and Healing How do religion and medicine approach the healing of disease
and distress? Are religion and medicine complementary or do they conflict? Is medicine a more evolved
form of religion, shorn of superstition and pseudoscience? This course explores religious and cultural
models of health and techniques for achieving it, from ancient Greece to Christian monasteries to modern
mindfulness and self‐care programs. We will consider ethical quandaries about death, bodily suffering,
mental illness, miraculous cures, and individual agency, all the while seeking to avoid simplistic narratives of
rationality and irrationality. 6 credits; NE, WR2, IDS; Winter; Sonja G Anderson
RELG 217 Faith and Doubt in the Modern Age Is religion an illusion we create to explain what we don’t
understand? An elaborate means to justify the violence we commit? Modern thinkers have put religion
under the microscope and held faith to account. This class considers a number of historically significant
critiques of religion in modern western thought and how those critiques have shaped the modern
theological and literary imagination. Is God dead? Or only hiding‐‐in aesthetic experience, solidarity with
the suffering, projects of liberation, or the depths of human love? 6 credits; HI, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
RELG 218 The Body in Judaism, Christianity, and Islam Mind and body are often considered separate but not
equal; the mind gives commands to the body and the body complies. Exploring the ways the three religious
traditions of Judaism, Christianity, and Islam think about the body will deepen our understanding of the
mind‐body relationship. We will ask questions such as: How does the body direct the mind? How do
religious practices discipline the body and the mind, and how do habits of body and mind change the forms
and meanings of these practices? Gender, sexuality, sensuality, and bodily function will be major axes of
analysis. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
RELG 219 Religious Law, Il/Legal Religions The concept of law plays a central role in religion, and the
concept of religion plays a central role in law. We often use the word ‘law’ to describe obligatory religious
practices. But is that ‘law,’ as compared with state law? Legal systems in the U.S. and Europe make laws
that protect religious people, and that protect governments from religion. But what does ‘religion’ mean in
a legal context? And how do implicit notions of religious law affect how judges deal with religion? We will
explore these questions using sources drawn from contemporary religions and recent legal disputes. 6
credits; HI, WR2, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
RELG 220 Justice and Responsibility How can we understand the demands of justice, the meaning of
responsibility, and the relation of both to power and politics? This course draws heavily on Christian
theology and modern European philosophy to explore a range of questions about religion, ethics, and
society. Is pacifism, resistance, political force, or compromise the most appropriate way to bring justice to
human relations? How should the ideals of faith inform questions about political authority, struggles for
equality, and tolerance of difference? As we explore these topics, we encounter diverse models of human
selfhood, moral obligation, and the role of religion in public life. 6 credits; HI, WR2; Winter; Lori K Pearson
RELG 221 Judaism and Gender How does gender shape the Jewish tradition, and how have Jewish historical
moments, texts, and practices shaped Jewish notions of gender? Taking Judaism as a test case, this course
will explore the relationship between historical circumstance, positionality, and the religious imaginary. We
will examine the ways that Jewish gender and theology inform each other. We will see how gender was at
play in Jewish negotiations of economic and social class, racial and ethnic status, even citizenship. Following
the threads of practice and narrative, we will think about how intersectional gender has shaped the stories
Jews tell, and the stories that are told about them. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23

372
RELG 225 Losing My Religion What happens when religion loses its plausibility‐‐whether because of its lack
of intellectual or moral credibility, or because it just doesn't make sense of highly ambiguous or deeply
troubling or powerfully novel experiences? This course explores how modern Western theologians and
philosophers have grappled with the loss of traditional religious beliefs and categories. What is the
appropriate response to losing one's religion? It turns out that few abandon it altogether, but instead find
new ways of naming the religious and the sacred, whether in relation to existential meaning, aesthetic
experience, moral hope, prophetic insight, or passionate love. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
RELG 227 Liberation Theologies Is God on the side of the poor? This course explores how liberation
theologians have called for justice, social change, and resistance by drawing on fundamental sources in
Christian tradition and by using economic and political theories to address poverty, racism, oppression,
gender injustice, and more. We explore the principles of liberationist thought, including black theology,
Latin American liberation theology, and feminist theology through writings of various contemporary
thinkers. We also examine the social settings out of which these thinkers have emerged, their critiques of
“traditional” theologies, and the new vision of community they have developed in various contexts. 6
credits; HI, IDS, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
RELG 231 From Luther to Kierkegaard Martin Luther and the Reformation have often been understood as
crucial factors in the rise of "modernity." Yet, the Reformation was also a medieval event, and Luther was
certainly a product of the late Middle Ages. This class focuses on the theology of the Protestant
Reformation, and traces its legacy in the modern world. We read Luther, Calvin, and Anabaptists, exploring
debates over politics, church authority, scripture, faith, and salvation. We then trace the appropriation of
these ideas by modern thinkers, who draw upon the perceived individualism of the Reformers in their
interpretations of religious experience, despair, freedom, and secularization. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IS; Not
offered 2022‐23
RELG 232 Queer Religions Passions, pleasures, ecstasies, and desires bear on religion and sexuality alike,
but intersections and tensions between these two domains are complicated. This course wagers that
bringing the hotly contested categories “queer” and “religion” together will illuminate the diverse range of
bodies, activities, and identities that inhabit both. The course explores religion and sexuality in Modern
Western thought, erotic elements in religious texts and art, and novels and narratives of religious belief and
practice in queer lives. The course combines concrete cases with theoretical tools that queer and feminist
scholars have used to analyze religious and sexual communities, bodies, and identities. 6 credits; HI, WR2,
IS; Not offered 2022‐23
RELG 233 Gender and Power in the Catholic Church How does power flow and concentrate within the
Catholic Church? What are the gendered aspects of the structure, history, and theology of Catholicism?
Through a combination of readings, discussions, and conversations with living figures, students will develop
the ability to critically and empathetically interpret issues of gender, sexuality, and power in the Catholic
Church, especially as these issues appear in official Vatican texts. Topics include: God, suffering,
sacraments, salvation, damnation, celibacy, homosexuality, the family, saints, the ordination of women as
priests, feminist theologies, canon law, the censuring of “heretical” theologians, Catholic hospital policy,
and the clerical sex abuse crisis. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IDS; Spring; Sonja G Anderson
RELG 234 Angels, Demons, and Evil Why do bad things happen to good people? Why do bad things happen,
period? Could angels and demons have something to do with it? This course asks how cosmology—an
account of how the universe is put together and the different entities that inhabit it—can be an answer to
the problem of evil and injustice. We will start with a historical investigation of the demonology and
angelology of ancient pagan, Jewish, and Christian texts and then move into modern practices such as

373
exorcism and magical realist literature. Along the way, we will keep asking how these systems justify the
existence of evil and provide programs for dealing with it. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IS; Spring; Sonja G Anderson
RELG 236 History of Antisemitism This course explores the historical, theological, and social foundations of
the phenomena variously known as antisemitism, anti‐Judaism, and Judeophobia. Starting in the Roman
period, we will trace the discursive arc of Jews as problematic Others throughout history. Forever mindful
that antisemitism is not just theoretical, we will also examine its specific manifestations in various historical
contexts. We will also pay close attention to antisemitism's relationship to other forms of oppression,
bigotry, and discrimination. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
RELG 237 Yoga: Religion, History, Practice This class will immerse students in the study of yoga from its first
textual representations to its current practice around the world. Transnationally, yoga has been unyoked
from religion. But the Sanskrit root yuj means to “add,” “join,” or “unite”—and in Indian philosophy and
practice it was: a method of devotion; a way to “yoke” the body/mind; a means to unite with Ultimate
Reality; a form of concentration and meditation. We will concentrate on texts dating back thousands of
years, from Patanjali’s Yoga Sutras to the Bhagavad Gita—and popular texts of today. Come prepared to
wear loose clothing. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
RELG 239 Religion & American Landscape The American landscape is rich in sacred places. The religious
imaginations, practices, and beliefs of its diverse inhabitants have shaped that landscape and been shaped
by it. This course explores ways of imagining relationships between land, community, and the sacred, the
mapping of religious traditions onto American land and cityscapes, and theories of sacred space and spatial
practices. Topics include religious place‐making practices of Indigenous, Latinx, and African Americans, as
well as those of Euro‐American communities from Puritans, Mormons, immigrant farmers. 6 credits; HI,
WR2, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
RELG 241 Islam in Asia: Lived Traditions and Meaning‐Making This course explores contemporary
expressions of Islam in Central, South, and Southeast Asia, and China. We will examine the ways theology,
philosophy, ethics, and poetics have served as crucial forms of Islamic meaning‐making in conversation with
Islamic legal traditions. Additionally, the course examines a diversity of mystical and embodied traditions,
as well as material cultural productions, emerging from interactions between indigenous rituals and
practices and Islamic poetic and philosophical traditions. 6 credits; HI, IS, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
RELG 242 Oh My G*d: Christianity and Sexual Revolutions This course introduces students to Western
Christianity by studying Christian movements, theologies, communities, eschatologies, and sensibilities
through the lens of marriage, sexual revolutions, and counterrevolutions. Using a multidisciplinary
approach, we will engage with scholarship from media theory, history, anthropology, sociology, and literary
studies to consider the boundaries of “Christian traditions” and the transformation of religious and sexual
cultures. While “sexuality” and “religion” are often imagined as oppositional social forces, this course will
introduce students to a rich and complex range of practices, modes of embodiment, and territories of
socio‐cultural negotiation in which religion and sexuality are entangled, imagined, and co‐constituted. 6
credits; HI, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
RELG 243 Native American Religious Freedom This course explores historical and legal contexts in which
Native Americans have practiced their religions in the United States. Making reference to the cultural
background of Native traditions, and the history of First Amendment law, the course explores landmark
court cases in Sacred Lands, Peyotism, free exercise in prisons, and sacralized traditional practices (whaling,
fishing, hunting) and critically examines the conceptual framework of "religion" as it has been applied to
the practice of Native American traditions. Service projects will integrate academic learning and student

374
involvement in matters of particular concern to contemporary native communities. 6 credits; HI, IDS;
Spring; Michael D McNally
RELG 246 Christianity and Capitalism The Bible says that “the love of money is the root of all evil,” but the
history of Christianity and mammon contains multitudes – voluntary poverty and acquisitive empires,
radical utopian communities and the blessings of business, peace movement feasts and prosperity gospels,
colonialism and humanitarian neo‐liberalism, and commodity fetishism for Christ. This course will use a
breadth of historical case studies alongside critical theories of modernity and capitalism to explore
Christianity’s relationship with wealth, from pre‐modern economic theologies, to faith in modern industrial
capitalism and Christianity’s vexed entanglements with late capitalist ideologies and practices. 6 credits; HI,
WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
RELG 249 Religion and American Public Life This course explores the contentious place of religion in
American public life. What roles do religious organizations and religious motivations play in the public
arenas of electoral politics, policy‐making, schools, courts, social service delivery, media, and marketplace?
What roles ought they play? In a pluralistic society, how are Americans to balance diverse moral positions
with our shared civic life? Engaging the insights of sociologists of religion, legal scholars, ethicists, political
theorists, and cultural critics this course will refine the language with which we address such broad
questions. Students will apply those insights to focused critical analyses of issues they choose. 6 credits; HI,
WR2, IDS, QRE; Not offered 2022‐23
RELG 250 It’s the End of the World: Religion, Moral Panics, and Apocalypses Pandemics, global climate
destabilization, the collapse of good order, the rise and fall of empires, and life at the edge of civilization ‐‐
for many religious communities, in many historical moments, it has seemed clear that the world is ending.
In this course, we will examine some of the ways that religious communities in the United States have
imagined and narrativized impending apocalypse(es) and the problem of living when the world is falling
apart. Emphasizing the cultural politics of apocalypticism, this course will explore race, gender, affect, ritual
practice, epistemology, and community formation in contexts including nineteenth century millennialist
movements, alien abductions, contemporary conspiracy theories, sex panics, indigenous resistance to
colonialism, cold war apocalyptic literature, and Afro‐futurist responses to climate collapse. 6 credits; HI,
WR2, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
RELG 254 Zen Buddhism An exploration of the "meditation" school of East Asian Buddhism. We will trace
Zen back to its purported origins in India, through its development in China, while focusing on its history in
Japan. In addition to its philosophy and practice, we will study its influence on various aspects of Japanese
culture‐‐ink painting, calligraphy, Noh theater, tea ceremony, samurai ethics, and martial arts. We will also
consider Zen's participation in Japan's nationalism and wartime aggression as well as its place in America,
where it has influenced art, literature, and religion for over a century. 6 credits; HI, IS, WR2; Spring;
Jonathan H Dickstein
RELG 257 Asian Religions and Ecology How “eco‐friendly” are Asian religious traditions? What does “eco‐
friendly” even mean? This course begins with an overview of the major religious traditions of South,
Southeast, Central, and East Asia. From this foundation, we turn to modern and contemporary ecological
thinkers, movements, and policies and discuss their indebtedness to, and divergence from, various religious
heritages. We will also explore how modernity, capitalism, industrialization, climate collapse, and Western
environmental movements have influenced eco‐advocacy in contemporary Asia. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IS;
Winter; Jonathan H Dickstein

375
RELG 264 Islamic Politics From the Islamic state to Islamic secularism, from progressivism to jihadism, this
course examines a broad range of Islamic political thought and practice. Through exploring thinkers and
movements both classical and modern who have shaped contemporary conversation, students will get
beneath the headlines and come to a robust understanding of the role of Islam in modern politics across
the globe. 6 credits; HI, IS, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
RELG 269 Food, Justice and Nonviolence: Hindu, Buddhist, and Jain Perspectives This course introduces
students to the history of the South and East Asian religious ethic of nonviolence (ahiṃsā). We will discuss
nonviolence and vegetarianism in Hindu, Buddhist, and Jain traditions, including critical perspectives from
inside and outside of those traditions. The course will explore the philosophical and cultural aspects of
nonviolence, with a focus on its relationship to karma, self‐purification, animal welfare, and food practices.
We conclude by examining modern deployments of the ethic in charged discourses concerning agriculture,
nationalism, environmental destruction and conservation, and social justice. 6 credits; HI, IS, WR2; Fall,
Winter; Jonathan H Dickstein
RELG 270 Philosophy of Religion A study of classic issues in the philosophy of religion and philosophical
theology. Possible topics include: the existence and nature of God; the status and nature of religious
experience; the problem of evil; the meaning of faith, belief, and truth; definitions of the self and salvation;
and the significance of religious pluralism for claims about truth and God. Readings are drawn from the
work of modern and contemporary philosophers and theologians. Prerequisites: Previous work in religion
or philosophy will be helpful but is not required. 6 credits; HI, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
RELG 271 Religion and Critical Theory Is God dead? What have the great modern and postmodern thinkers
done with religion? What is the function of our pleasures, desires, anxieties, and passions in relation to
religion? This course explores the surprising ways in which religion becomes a resource for understanding
the contradictions of modernity. We examine theories of history and time as well as critiques of capitalism
in relation to Christianity, Judaism, and Islam. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
RELG 273 Religious Approaches to Death As the inevitable conclusion of every human existence, our lives
are profoundly shaped by death. Consequently, we are all in the process of approaching death—both our
own and that of others. This course examines the stunning variety of ways in which humans have
approached death and mortality throughout history and across the globe. We will (1) develop a vocabulary
of human mortality and death that will allow us to (2) illuminate the structural and functional
continuities/discontinuities present across human approaches to death and (3) think critically about
mortality and death as we approach them in our own lives. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IS; Fall; Jonathan H Dickstein
RELG 274 Religion and Biomedical Ethics This class examines the ethical principles that often guide decision‐
making in health care. It focuses on principles espoused by many religious and humanistic traditions, within
the context of a modern, pluralistic society. Using plentiful case studies, we consider a number of issues in
bioethics, including assisted suicide; maternal‐fetal relations; artificial reproduction, including human
cloning; the use of human subjects in research; health care justice and reform; triage and allocation of
sparse medical resources; and public health issues surrounding the COVID‐19 pandemic. 6 credits; HI, WR2;
Not offered 2022‐23
RELG 275 Death, Heaven, and Hell What happens after we die? Immortality of the soul? Resurrection of the
body? Reincarnation? Unending punishment, eternal reward, temporary purgation? This course explores
the history of the afterlife in ancient paganism, Judaism, and Christianity, the theological functions of the
doctrines of heaven and hell in contemporary religious communities, and the question of what a good
death looks like in light of various postmortem destinies. 6 credits; Not offered 2022‐23

376
RELG 278 Semantics of Love in Sufism Sufism broadly refers to a complex of devotional, literary, ethical,
theological, and mystical traditions in Islam. More specifically, it refers to the activities associated with
institutionalized master‐disciple relationships, which define the paths through which Muslims have sought
experiential knowledge of God. In both the broad and narrow sense of Sufism, love has been a prominent
means of Sufi self‐representation. In this course, we will explore the ideas and practices semantically
associated with love in the Sufi tradition and analyze the ways in which these ideas and practices have both
shaped and been shaped by individual lives, religious institutions, and socio‐cultural contexts. 6 credits; HI,
WR2, IS; Fall; Kambiz GhaneaBassiri
RELG 280 The Politics of Sex in Asian Religion This course will explore the intersection of religion, sex, and
power, focusing on Asian religions. Key questions include: In what ways do religions normalize certain
constructions of sex, gender, and sexuality while marking others deviant and unnatural? How do they teach
us to perform (and sometimes to overcome) "masculinity" or "femininity"? We will probe these questions
by studying both traditional and contemporary examples—such as abortion and reproductive politics in
Buddhism, Confucian‐influenced practice of foot‐binding, Buddhist masculinities and male‐love, sati (widow
burning) and same‐sex marriage in Hinduism, and the concept of a “third sex” in these traditions. 6 credits;
HI, WR2, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
RELG 282 Samurai: Ethics of Death and Loyalty This course explores the history of samurai since the
emergence of warrior class in medieval times, to the modern developments of samurai ethics as the icon of
Japanese national identity. Focusing on its connection with Japanese religion and culture, we will
investigate the origins of the purported samurai ideals of loyalty, honor, self‐sacrifice, and death. In
addition to regular class sessions, there will be a weekly kyudo (Japanese archery) practice on Wednesday
evening (7‐9 pm), which will enable students to study samurai history in context through gaining first‐hand
experience in the ritualized practice of kyudo. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
RELG 283 Mysticism and Gender Love. Emptiness. Union. Ecstasy. These are some ways that humans have
described “mystical experience,” often defined as an immediate encounter with God, ultimate reality, or
the absolute—however those may be construed. This course interrogates “mysticism” across traditions,
with close attention to issues of gender, sexuality, and race, through studying a number of famous female
and male mystics across historical periods. Questions include: What, exactly, is mysticism? Is it gendered? Is
it just the firing of a bunch of neurons? What is the role of the body in mystical practice? Are mystics critics
of institutionalized religion? Radicals for social justice? 6 credits; HI, WR2, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
RELG 284 Art and Religion For much of recorded history, what we now call “art” and what we now call
“religion” were inseparable. In the modern period, art and religion have gone their separate ways. What, if
anything, continues to connect them? Is art inherently religious? Can religion be considered a form of art?
In this class, we look at modern works of art (from Renaissance painting to contemporary performance art)
alongside the sights and sounds of religion (including the symbols, rituals, and architecture of multiple
religious traditions), seeking points of confluence and displacement between these apparently disparate
areas of culture. 6 credits; HI, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
RELG 285 Islam in America: Race, Religion and Politics This course examines the history of Islam in America
from the colonial period to the present. It contextualizes American Islam at the cross section of American
religious history and modern Islamic history. While primarily focused on the politics of race and religion in
America, the course also explores the influence of comparative theology and religious studies on
conceptions of religious diversity; the relationship between race, religion and ideas of progress; the role of
Islam in the civil rights movement and in nationalist movements in Muslim‐majority societies; and the rise
of militant Islam as a matter of global concern. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23

377
RELG 287 Many Marys The history of Christianity usually focuses on Jesus: the stories and doctrines that
have revolved around him. This course will focus on Mary and the many ways she has contributed to the
various lived traditions of Christianity. We will, for example, consider the mother of Jesus (Miriam, as she
was first called) as she has figured in literature, art, apparition, and ritual practice around the world. We will
also consider Mary Magdalene, her foil, who appears in popular discourse from the Gnostic gospels to The
Da Vinci Code. Case studies, texts, images, and film will be our fare. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IDS; Not offered
2022‐23
RELG 289 Global Religions in Minnesota Somali Muslims in Rice County? Hindus in Maple Grove? Hmong
shamans in St. Paul hospitals? Sun Dances in Pipestone? In light of globalization, the religious landscape of
Minnesota, like America more broadly, has become more visibly diverse. Lake Wobegon stereotypes aside,
Minnesota has always been characterized by some diversity but the realities of immigration, dispossession,
dislocation, economics, and technology have made religious diversity more pressing in its implications for
every arena of civic and cultural life. This course bridges theoretical knowledge with engaged field research
focused on how Midwestern contexts shape global religious communities and how these communities
challenge and transform Minnesota. 6 credits; HI, IDS, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
RELG 300 Theories and Methods in the Study of Religion What, exactly, is religion and what conditions of
modernity have made it urgent to articulate such a question in the first place? Why does religion exert such
force in human society and history? Is it an opiate of the masses or an illusion laden with human wish‐
fulfillment? Is it a social glue? A subjective experience of the sacred? Is it simply a universalized Protestant
Christianity in disguise, useful in understanding, and colonizing, the non‐Christian world? This seminar, for
junior majors and advanced majors from related fields, explores generative theories from anthropology,
sociology, psychology, literary studies, and the history of religions. 6 credits; HI; Winter; Lori K Pearson
RELG 322 Apocalypse How? When will the world end, and how? What’s wrong with the world—morally,
politically, naturally—such that people have seen its destruction as necessary or inevitable? Are visions of
“The End” a form of sophisticated resistance literature, aimed at oppressive systems of power? Or are they
evidence of a disturbed mind disconnected from reality? This seminar takes a deep dive into the contours
of apocalyptic thought, which in its most basic form is about unmasking the deceptions of the given world
by revealing the secret workings of the universe. We will begin with the earliest apocalypses, found in
ancient Jewish and Christian texts, and move into modern religious and “secular” visions of cosmic collapse.
Our approach will be historical and comparative, and we will explore topics ranging from doomsday cults to
climate catastrophe, visions of heaven to tours of hell, malevolent angels to meddling UFOs, all the while
asking how the apocalyptic imagination creates, as one thinker put it, “another world to live in.” 6 credits;
HI, WR2, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
RELG 329 Modernity and Tradition How do we define traditions if they change over time and are marked by
internal conflict? Is there anything stable about a religious tradition—an essence, or a set of practices or
beliefs that abide amidst diversity and mark it off from a surrounding culture or religion? How do people
live out or re‐invent their traditions in the modern world? In this seminar we explore questions about
pluralism, identity, authority, and truth, and we examine the creative ways beliefs and practices change in
relation to culture. We consider how traditions grapple with difference, especially regarding theology,
ethics, law, and gender. 6 credits; HI, WR2; Spring; Lori K Pearson
RELG 344 Lived Religion in America The practices of popular, or local, or lived religion in American culture
often blur the distinction between the sacred and profane and elude religious studies frameworks based on
the narrative, theological, or institutional foundations of "official" religion. This course explores American
religion primarily through the lens of the practices of lived religion with respect to ritual, the body, the life

378
cycle, the market, leisure, and popular culture. Consideration of a wide range of topics, including ritual
healing, Christmas, cremation, and Elvis, will nourish an ongoing discussion about how to make sense of
lived religion. 6 credits; HI, IDS, WR2; Winter; Michael D McNally
RELG 359 Buddhist Studies India Program: Buddhist Meditation Traditions Students will complement their
understanding of Buddhist thought and culture through the study and practice of traditional meditation
disciplines. This course emphasizes the history, characteristics, and approach of three distinct meditation
traditions within Buddhism: Vipassana, Zazen, and Dzogchen. Meditation practice and instruction is led in
the morning and evening six days a week by representatives of these traditions who possess a theoretical
as well as practical understanding of their discipline. Lectures and discussions led by the program director
complement and contextualize the three meditation traditions being studied. Prerequisite: Acceptance into
the Carleton‐Antioch Program required. 7‐8 credits; NE, IS; Fall; Arthur P McKeown
RELG 362 Spirit Possession This course considers spirit possession in relation to religion, gender, and
agency. Through surveying a number of works on spirit possession‐‐recent and past, theoretical and
ethnographic‐‐we will analyze representations of the female subject in particular and arguments about
agency that attend these representations. This class will explicitly look at post‐colonial accounts of spirit
possession and compare them to Euro‐American Christian conceptions of personhood. We will consider
how these Euro‐Christian conceptions might undergird secular‐liberal constructions of agency, and
contribute to feminist ideas about the proper female subject. 6 credits; HI, WR2, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
RELG 365 Mysticism Love. Emptiness. Union. Ecstasy. These are just a handful of ways that humans have
described “mystical experience,” often explicated as an immediate encounter with God, ultimate reality, or
the absolute—however those may be construed. This comparative course will explore the phenomenon of
“mysticism” across traditions as we try to understand (and interrogate) both the term and the plethora of
experiences that fall under its rubric. Questions will include: What is mysticism? Is mystical experience
gendered? What is the role of the body in mystical practice? Does mystical experience free us? Are mystics
critics of institutional religion or social injustice? 6 credits; NE, WR2, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
RELG 399 Senior Research Seminar This seminar will acquaint students with research tools in various fields
of religious studies, provide an opportunity to present and discuss research work in progress, hone writing
skills, and improve oral presentation techniques. Prerequisite: Religion 300 and acceptance of proposal for
senior integrative exercise and instructor permission. 6 credits; HI; Winter; Kristin C Bloomer
RELG 400 Integrative Exercise 3 credits; S/NC; Spring; Kristin C Bloomer

Other Courses Pertinent to Religion









CLAS 145 Ancient Greek Religion
HIST 131 Saints and Society in Late Antiquity
HIST 135 Making and Breaking Institutions in the Middle Ages: Structure, Culture, Corruption, and
Reform (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 201 Rome Program: Building Power and Piety in Medieval Italy, CE 300‐1150
HIST 288 Reason, Authority, and Love in Medieval France (not offered in 2022‐23)
HIST 332 Image Makers and Breakers in the Premodern World (not offered in 2022‐23)
MELA 230 Jewish Collective Memory
SOAN 228 Public Sociology of Religion

379

Russian
Students considering language study outside the Western European offerings will find Russian a
refreshing change. In our first-year sequence we cover the fundamentals with equal emphasis on
speaking, listening, writing, and reading. Traditional materials are supplemented by fairy tales, folk
songs, rock music video, film clips and internet materials. By the end of Russian 204, students are
able to read short prose by Chekhov, Dostoevsky, and Tolstoy, and to communicate functionally
with native speakers. Language courses beyond 204 address contemporary Russian cultural and
social issues while focusing on skill development at the intermediate (205), and advanced level.
Students with pre-college Russian, either acquired or native, should consult the department for
placement information.
Literature and Cultural Studies
We teach a variety of courses in English translation with no prerequisites (230-295). Courses at the
330-395 level which are conducted entirely in Russian aim to expand students' linguistic range as
well as their understanding of analytical techniques and cultural contexts.
Requirements for the Russian Major
66 credits, including the following:






RUSS 205 (6 credits);
RUSS 207 or 307 or the equivalent (4 credits);
12 credits in English: Russian courses conducted in English numbered 150 or above or CAMS 237
18 credits numbered 330 or above, six of which will normally be RUSS 395

LCST 245 The Critical Toolbox (6 credits)
In consultation with their advisor, students may substitute a comparable methods course in a
different field, including:
o
o
o
o
o
o
o

ENGL 295 Critical Methods
GWSS 200 Gender, Power and the Pursuit of Knowledge
GWSS 334 Feminist Theory
HIST 298 Junior Year History Colloquium
POSC 230 Methods of Political Research
RELG 300 Theories and Methods in the Study of Religion
SOAN 240 Methods of Social Research

Electives: 14 credits
Elective credits may be selected from Russian courses numbered 204 or above and History
240-242; 341


the integrative exercise (6 credits)

Courses 101, 102 and 103 do not count toward the major.
Study Abroad: Participation in foreign study programs is highly recommended. Consult the "OffCampus Studies" section of the catalog for a description of the Carleton Moscow Program.

380

Departmental approval of credit for participation in non-Carleton overseas programs should be
sought before leaving campus.
Language House: Students have the opportunity to immerse themselves in the language by living
in Parish International House. A native Russian Language Associate provides opportunities for
conversation practice and assists students in organizing a variety of cultural activities.
Requirements for the Russian Minor
36 credits with a grade of C- or better, including:




RUSS 205 and
12 credits numbered 330 or above.
Elective credits may be chosen from among
o other offerings in the Russian section,
o CAMS 237 and
o HIST 240‐242, 341

Courses 101, 102 and 103 do not count toward the minor.
Russian Courses
RUSS 101 Elementary Russian For students with no previous training in or minimal knowledge of Russian.
Simultaneous development of skills in speaking, reading, aural comprehension, writing. Students with prior
instruction or who speak Russian at home should consult the department for placement information. Class
meets five days a week. 6 credits; NE; Fall; Anna M Dotlibova, Laura Goering
RUSS 102 Elementary Russian Continues Russian 101. Prerequisite: Russian 101 or equivalent. 6 credits; NE;
Winter; Anna M Dotlibova, Victoria Y Thorstensson
RUSS 103 Elementary Russian Concludes introductory method of Russian 101‐102. Prerequisite: Russian
102 or equivalent. 6 credits; NE; Spring; Laura Goering
RUSS 107 Moscow Program: Beginning Grammar This course will focus on continued study of the
fundamentals of Russian grammar, vocabulary expansion, and activation. This course is conducted by
members of Moscow State University Philological Faculty and supervised by the program director.
Prerequisite: For students who have just recently begun their study of the Russian language, having
completed or tested beyond elementary Russian 102. 4 credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐23
RUSS 108 Moscow Program: Beginning Phonetics This course is taken in combination with Russian 107.
Students focus on the essentials of Russian pronunciation with preliminary work in intonation. This course
is conducted by members of Moscow State University Philological Faculty and supervised by the program
director. 2 credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐23
RUSS 109 Moscow Program: Beginning Conversation This course is taken in combination with Russian 107.
Emphasis on socially relevant material. This course is conducted by members of Moscow State University
Philological Faculty and supervised by the program director. 3 credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐23
RUSS 204 Intermediate Russian Continued four‐skill development using texts and resources from a variety
of sources. Emphasis on communicative skills. Prerequisite: Russian 103 or equivalent. 6 credits; NE; Fall;
Victoria Y Thorstensson

381
RUSS 205 Russian in Cultural Contexts In this course students continue to develop skills of narration,
listening comprehension, and writing, while exploring issues of contemporary Russian life and
consciousness. The issues are examined from the position of two cultures: American and Russian. The
course draws on a variety of sources for reading and viewing, including the periodic press, film, and music.
Prerequisite: Russian 204 or equivalent. 6 credits; IS, NE; Winter; Victoria Y Thorstensson
RUSS 207 Moscow Program: Intermediate Grammar This course aims at vocabulary expansion and the
assimilation and activation of formulaic conversational structures and speech etiquette at the same time it
develops familiarity with more complex principles of Russian grammar. This course is conducted by
members of Moscow State University Philological Faculty and supervised by the program director.
Prerequisite: Russian 205 or equivalent. 4 credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐23
RUSS 208 Moscow Program: Intermediate Phonetics This course is taken in combination with Russian 207.
Students focus on the essentials of Russian pronunciation and correction. Preliminary work in intonation
will be offered. This course is conducted by members of Moscow State University Philological Faculty and
supervised by the program director. 2 credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐23
RUSS 209 Moscow Program: Intermediate Conversation This course is taken in combination with Russian
207. Emphasis will be placed on socially relevant reading materials. This course is conducted by members of
Moscow State University Philological Faculty and supervised by the program director. 3 credits; NE; Not
offered 2022‐23
RUSS 226 Moscow Program: Russia's Hallowed Places This course explores localities in Russia that have
acquired the significance of hallowed or sacred places, the reasons underlying their designation, and the
diversity of belief systems they embody. Localities considered include places in and around Moscow (some
holy, others cursed), the routes of literary heroes (and their creators) in St. Petersburg, sites of legendary
historical significance in Central Russia, and the "sacred sea" of Siberia, Lake Baikal, and its Buryat‐Mongol
shamanist‐Buddhist environs. Course materials: readings, films, excursions, lectures, and travel. Student
learning is assessed through occasional quizzes, weekly discussions, and integrative blog writing
assignments. Prerequisite: Acceptance in Russian OCS Program. 6 credits; HI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
RUSS 237 Beyond Beef Stroganoff: Food in Russian Culture How did the Russian peasant stove shape
culinary culture? Why did Catherine the Great force her subjects to cultivate potatoes? How did the
October Revolution change the way Soviet citizens ate? In this course we will study key aspects of Russian
history and culture through the lens of culinary history. Topics will include: food and fasting in Russian
Orthodoxy; food, class and power under the tsars; high Russian (or is it French?) culture of the nineteenth
century; Soviet policies for feeding the worker; non‐Russian cuisines in the Soviet Union; drinking culture
and anti‐alcohol campaigns; food and nationalism in the twenty‐first century. Includes hands‐on sessions
on Russian food preparation. In English. 6 credits; HI, IS; Winter; Laura Goering
RUSS 244 The Rise of the Russian Novel From the terse elegance of Pushkin to the psychological probing of
Dostoevsky to the finely wrought realism of Tolstoy, this course examines the evolution of the genre over
the course of the nineteenth century, ending with a glimpse of things to come on the eve of the Russian
Revolution. Close textual analysis of the works will be combined with exploration of their historical and
cultural context. No prior knowledge of Russian or Russian history is required. 6 credits; LA, WR2, IS; Not
offered 2022‐23
RUSS 261 Lolita Rejected by every major publisher, first released in France in 1955 by a press known for
pornographic trash, Vladimir Nabokov's scandalous novel about a middle‐aged immigrant college professor
obsessed with a twelve‐year‐old girl continues to feed controversy as well as to challenge and delight

382
readers with its labyrinthian narrative, endless wordplay, innumerable intertextual allusions, and
troublesome eroticism. In addition to reading the novel, we will focus on critical approaches that address
the cultural clash underlying the ostensible plot, changing reception, and reception of the novel outside the
US. Thus warned, you are invited to join the jury in deliberating the designs and delights of this twentieth‐
century literary classic. 3 credits; LA, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
RUSS 266 Dostoevsky An introduction to the works of Dostoevsky. Readings include Poor Folk, Notes from
the Underground, and The Brothers Karamazov. Conducted entirely in English. Prerequisite: No
prerequisites and no knowledge of Russian literature or history required. 3 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐
23
RUSS 267 War and Peace Close reading and discussion of Tolstoy's magnum opus. Conducted entirely in
English. Prerequisite: No prerequisites and no knowledge of Russian literature or history required. 3 credits;
LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
RUSS 280 1917 Short texts in a variety of genres connected with the momentous events of 1917 provide
the basis for continued development of reading, writing, listening, and speaking skills. Prerequisite:
Instructor permission required. Waitlist only. Russian 205 or 293 required. Not open to students who have
received credit for a 300‐level Russian course. 2 credits; NE, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
RUSS 301 Current Events in the Russophone Media In weekly meetings we will discuss in Russian current
events taking place in Russia and around the world as reported by the Russophone online media. Emphasis
will be on reading, listening, and conversation. Vocabulary building by topics; grammar as needed.
Prerequisite: Completion of or concurrent registration in Russian 205 or instructor consent. 3 credits; NE, IS;
Not offered 2022‐23
RUSS 307 Moscow Program: Advanced Grammar This course combines advanced work in Russian grammar
(largely corrective) and fundamentals in composition, with conversational Russian. Prerequisite: At least 6‐
12 credits beyond Russian 205/206. 4 credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐23
RUSS 308 Moscow Program: Advanced Phonetics and Intonation This course is taken in combination with
Russian 307. Students focus on corrective pronunciation and theory and practice of Russian intonation. This
course is conducted by members of Moscow State University Philological Faculty and supervised by the
program director. 2 credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐23
RUSS 309 Moscow Program: Advanced Practicum This course aims at skill development in speaking and oral
presentation as well as in limited forms of composition. It is taken in combination with Russian 307 and
conducted by members of Moscow State University Philological Faculty and supervised by the program
director. Prerequisite: Russian 205 and 6 credits in Russian at the 330 level. 3 credits; NE; Not offered 2022‐
23
RUSS 331 The Wonderful World of Russian Animation Beginning in the 1910’s, Russian and then the Soviet
Union was home to some of the most creative and innovative animated films in the world. In this course we
will examine selected animated shorts in the context of Russian history and culture. Topics to be considered
include the roots of animated film in the folk tale, the role of cartoons in educating the model Soviet child,
the language of Soviet colonial discourse, and the ways in which post‐Soviet animated films perpetuated or
subverted past traditions. Prerequisite: Russian 205 or consent of the instructor. 3 credits; LA, IS; Fall; Anna
M Dotlibova

383
RUSS 332 Chekhov in Film, Film in Chekhov Chekhov’s literary oeuvre appeared at the same moment as the
birth of cinematography, and the two are closely intertwined. His art rests on what Sergei Eisenstein called
the central principle of film: montage, visuality, the constant changing of shots, and dislocation in time and
space. It is no wonder that Chekhov’s stories were adapted for the screen in record numbers: to date we
count 235 film adapations plus 10 animated films. In this course we will read several of his best short
stories, view films based on his works, and analyze the cinematographic qualities of Chekhov’s prose.
Prerequisite: Russian 205 or instructor's permission. 3 credits; LA, IS; Winter; Anna M Dotlibova
RUSS 341 From Folktale to Fanfiction: Russian Short Prose In addition to its well‐known “doorstop novels,”
Russia has a rich tradition of short fiction. This course presents a sampling of prose genres, from
nineteenth‐century classic folktales and short stories to contemporary works in which twentieth‐ and
twenty first‐century writers play with tradition. Conducted in Russian. Prerequisite: Russian 205 or the
equivalent. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
RUSS 342 Post‐Soviet film A study of selected post‐Soviet films in their historical and cultural context.
Conducted in Russian. Prerequisite: Russian 205 or instructor consent. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
RUSS 345 Russian Cultural Idioms of the Nineteenth Century An introduction to the names, quotations, and
events that every Russian knows‐‐knowledge which is essential to understanding Russian literature, history,
and culture of the last two centuries. We will study the works of Russian writers (Griboedov and Pushkin,
Leskov and Dostoevsky), composers (Glinka, Mussorgsky, Rimsky‐Korsakov, and Tchaikovsky), artists
(Briullov, Ivanov, the Itinerants) and actors (Mochalov, Shchepkin) in the context of social thought and the
social movements of the nineteenth century. Conducted in Russian. Prerequisite: Russian 205 or permission
of the instructor. 6 credits; IS, LA; Not offered 2022‐23
RUSS 351 Chekhov A study of Chekhov's short fiction, both as an object of literary analysis and in the
interpretation of critics, stage directors and filmmakers of the twentieth century. We will also examine the
continuation of the Chekhovian tradition in the works of writers such as Bunin, Petrushevskaia and
Pietsukh. Conducted in Russian. Prerequisite: Russian 205 or permission of the instructor. 6 credits; LA, IS;
Not offered 2022‐23
RUSS 400 Integrative Exercise 1‐6 credit; S/NC; Fall, Winter, Spring

Sociology and Anthropology
Joining two disciplines as it does, the Sociology and Anthropology Department at Carleton seeks to present
a truly unified vision of the disciplines, both in the major as a whole and in many of the individual courses.
Our principal goal is to give students a comparative perspective on human societies, exploring the vast
range of similarities and differences among them in space and time.

The department strongly recommends that Sociology/Anthropology 110 or 111 be taken prior to
enrolling in courses numbered 200 or above.
Requirements for the Sociology/Anthropology Major
The Sociology/Anthropology major is seventy-two credits.
It is recommend but not required that majors and students considering a major take both 110 and
111, preferably by the end of their sophomore year.

384


SOAN 110 or SOAN 111

Before students can enroll in the major's research methods course, Sociology/Anthropology 240,
students must fulfill the statistics requirement.





SOAN 239 or
STAT 120 (formerly MATH 215) or
STAT 250 (formerly MATH 275) or
a score of 4 or 5 on the AP Math Statistics exam

Students should plan on taking the research methods course, Sociology/Anthropology 240 and the
theory courses, 330 and 331, no later than their junior year




SOAN 240
SOAN 330
SOAN 331

Students will work on their comprehensive exercise during their senior year, take the comps writing
course, Sociology/Anthropology 396 in the fall and completing the comps independent work,
Sociology/Anthropology 400 in the winter.



SOAN 396
SOAN 400

A maximum of 12 credits can be applied toward the major from relevant courses in off-campus
programs. The following courses may also be applied toward the major:







ARCN 111 Archaeology of the Americas (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARCN 211 Coercion and Exploitation: Material Histories of Labor
ARCN 246 Archaeological Methods & Lab
ARCN 395 Archaeology: Science, Ethics, Nationalism and Cultural Property (not offered in 2022‐23)
GWSS 200 Gender, Sexuality & the Pursuit of Knowledge
GWSS 398 Capstone: Transnational Feminist Activism (not offered in 2022‐23)

In keeping with our philosophy of comparative studies and commitment to understanding human
societies other than the one we live in, majors are strongly urged to develop an in-depth study of a
culture other than their own. This may be done through regular courses, independent study, or on
off-campus programs. Early in their junior year, students should discuss ways of integrating such an
in-depth study into their work in the major with their advisers.
Sociology/Anthropology Courses
SOAN 100 “We’re all in this together!” Rhetorical Responses to the COVID‐19 Pandemic When the COVID‐
19 pandemic emerged, a series of cultural messages quickly materialized in U.S. society. Statements such
as, “we’re all in this together” and “the silver linings of coronavirus,” emphasized unity and gratitude while
existing socio‐political and generational divides were reinforced with “it’s a hoax” and “young people are
spreading the virus.” What do these messages reveal about ourselves and society? This A&I seminar
introduces students to the formal discipline of sociology through deconstructing rhetorical responses to the
COVID‐19 pandemic. We seek to understand why these cultural messages are problematic using an

385
intellectual perspective that emphasizes “the social construction of reality.” 6 credits; AI, WR1, QRE, IDS;
Fall; Annette M Nierobisz
SOAN 108 In & Out of Africa: How Transnational Black Lives Matter In our contemporary world‐on‐the‐
move, people forge ties across countries and continents. This course introduces students to an Africanist
transnational anthropology, emphasizing practices of care and connection among African migrants in both
the U.S. and Europe. In families, migrant organizations, and workplaces, diasporic Africans circulate stories
and strategies that respond to nationalist and often racist attitudes they encounter in their places of
migration. Through readings by African/diaspora scholars and creative multi‐method assignments, this
course engages with the back‐and‐forth, profoundly transnational movement of connections, people, ideas,
and institutions. 6 credits; QRE, SI, IS, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
SOAN 110 Introduction to Anthropology Anthropology is the study of all human beings in all their diversity,
an exploration of what it means to be human throughout the globe. This course helps us to see ourselves,
and others, from a new perspective. By examining specific analytic concepts—such as culture—and
research methods—such as participant observation—we learn how anthropologists seek to understand,
document, and explain the stunning variety of human cultures and ways of organizing society. This course
encourages you to consider how looking behind cultural assumptions helps anthropologists solve real world
dilemmas. 6 credits; SI, IS; Fall, Winter, Spring; Colin McLaughlin‐Alcock, Constanza C Ocampo‐Raeder
SOAN 111 Introduction to Sociology Sociology is an intellectual discipline, spanning the gap between the
sciences and humanities while often (though not always) involving itself in public policy debates, social
reform, and political activism. Sociologists study a startling variety of topics using qualitative and
quantitative methods. Still, amidst all this diversity, sociology is centered on a set of core historical theorists
(Marx/Weber/Durkheim) and research topics (race/class/gender inequality). We will explore these
theoretical and empirical foundations by reading and discussing influential texts and select topics in the
study of social inequality while relating them to our own experiences and understanding of the social
world. 6 credits; SI; Fall, Winter, Spring; Elizabeth H Trudeau, Annette M Nierobisz
SOAN 113 Sociology of Work & Organizations Most of us “go to work” at some point in our lives. Whether
it's a summer job, a side hustle or a life‐long career, people invest a lot of our time and energy into planning
to be, preparing for, and operating as members of the “workforce.” Work shapes all aspects of people’s
lives from their ability to provide for basic needs to their personal and social identities. In industrialized
societies work is often characterized by membership in complex formalized organizations. However recent
history and sociological theory raise a lot of questions about how work and organized labor may be
changing. How do we define success? Who makes the most money and why? Have recent events like the
pandemic changed the way we approach work? This course will cover classic and contemporary research
into social organizations and the shifting landscape of work in post‐industrial society. Topics will include the
rise of complex for profit and nonprofit organizations, inequality in the workplace, sex work and illicit labor,
and recent trends in the labor force. 6 credits; SI, IS; Spring; Elizabeth H Trudeau
SOAN 114 Modern Families: An Introduction to the Sociology of the Family What makes a family? How has
the conception of kinship and the 'normal' family changed over the generations? In this introductory class,
we examine these questions, drawing on a variety of course materials ranging from classic works in
sociology to contemporary blogs on family life. The class focuses on diversity in family life, paying particular
attention to the intersection between the family, race and ethnicity, and social class. We'll examine these
issues at the micro and macro level, incorporating texts that focus on individuals' stories as well as
demographics of the family. 6 credits; SI, QRE, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23

386
SOAN 140 Animals and Society Other‐than‐human animals are an overwhelming presence in our collective
and individual lives. In this course, we will explore questions regarding the intersection of the lives of
human and non‐human animals from a sociological perspective. Such questions include: Why do we love
some animals to the point of considering them family members, but vilify and even eat others? Are “pets”
monsters of dependence created by human oppression, or do pets and people coexist interdependently? Is
human treatment of non‐human animals related in significant ways to such enduring social problems as
racism, sexism, and violence against vulnerable groups? 6 credits; SI; Not offered 2022‐23
SOAN 151 Global Minnesota: An Anthropology of Our State The state of Minnesota, like the rest of the U.S.,
has been formed by the migration and settlement of peoples from across the world at different historical
moments. Though often hidden from public view, the state is home to peoples with diverse cultural and
religious practices, making Minnesota a microcosm of the global. This course will provide an anthropology
of Minnesota by examining the different migration histories and experiences of Minnesota’s varied
population groups. Through a study of the making of Minnesota and its population groups, the course will
examine borders and movement from a global and historical perspective, as well as explore the presence of
different cultural and religious groups in Minnesota and the social relations they form. This course will help
students see Minnesota and the people that call it home in new ways. 6 credits; SI, WR2, IDS; Not offered
2022‐23
SOAN 170 Investigating (In)Equality: Comparative Welfare States Is health care coverage a right of
citizenship, or a commodity purchased in the marketplace? Where does the responsibility of caring for
children and the elderly lie? Nations around the world answer these and similar policy questions quite
differently, resulting in wide‐ranging consequences. Sociologists use the phrase “welfare state” to refer to
the role the government plays in protecting and promoting citizens’ well being. By comparing the U.S.
welfare state with that of other countries, we will examine the socio‐cultural mechanisms that shape
equality/inequality and investigate the impact of the welfare state on both social institutions and people’s
life chances. 6 credits; SI, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
SOAN 201 Colonialism, Oil, And The War On Terror: The Global Middle East Through processes like
colonialism, oil extraction, and the war on terror, the Middle East forms an important pivot, shaping global
political and economic structures. This course will examine how the Middle East has developed in dynamic
interaction with the wider globe. Yet, we will resist the urge to treat the Middle East merely as an object of
Western intervention. Rather, we will explore how the West and wider globe are also shaped by this
interaction. In particular, we will examine how ideas about modernity, secularism, and liberalism—key
elements of contemporary Western identity—are shaped through dynamic interconnection with Middle
East. 6 credits; SI, WR2, IS; Spring; Colin McLaughlin‐Alcock
SOAN 203 Anthropology of Good Intentions Is the environmental movement making progress? Do
responsible products actually help local populations? Is international AID alleviating poverty and fostering
development? Today there are thousands of programs with sustainable development goals yet their
effectiveness is often contested at the local level. This course explores the impacts of sustainable
development, conservation, and AID programs to look beyond the good intentions of those that implement
them. In doing so we hope to uncover common pitfalls behind good intentions and the need for sound
social analysis that recognizes, examines, and evaluates the role of cultural complexity found in populations
targeted by these programs. Prerequisite: The department strongly recommends that
Sociology/Anthropology 110 or 111 be taken prior to enrolling in courses numbered 200 or above. 6 credits;
SI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23

387
SOAN 206 Critical Perspectives on Work in the Twenty‐first Century The American employment landscape
continues to shift rapidly. In this course, we explore how social statuses such as gender, race, social class,
age, and disability impact different types of workers who find themselves also challenged by work overload,
new technologies, downsizing, and an unstable economy that mandates a reconsideration of retirement
goals. Both ethnographic and statistical accounts inform our study of the academic field called, “Sociology
of Work, Occupations, and Organizations.” While reviewing course material you will concurrently
investigate a career of personal interest, learning what your “dream job” encompasses and how it functions
in the contemporary world. 6 credits; SI, WR2, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
SOAN 207 Sociology of Gender What is gender and how do we make sense of it? Ideas about gender have a
powerful influence on our lives and society but understanding this influence can be complex. From the
recent women’s march and #MeToo movement to debates about transgender rights, our social landscape is
full of pressing questions related to gender. Why does gender inequality persist? How is gender
identification determined? Is it possible to eliminate gender categorization or is it inevitable? This course
will offer students an overview of sociological theories that explain how societies think about and are built
on gender and gender differences. It will cover variations in how individuals experience and identify based
on embodied and lived differences as well as the social forces that shape how society defines gender
categories and gendered behavior. Prerequisite: The department strongly recommends that
Sociology/Anthropology 110 or 111 be taken prior to enrolling in courses numbered 200 or above. 6 credits;
SI, IDS; Winter; Elizabeth H Trudeau
SOAN 208 Gentrification Gentrification, a process of neighborhood‐level class displacement, whereby
devalued urban areas are redeveloped into trendy hubs, is one of the predominant modes of urban change
in the twenty‐first century. In this class, we will first develop a general understanding of how gentrification
works. Then we will direct ethnographic attention to explore how gentrification takes place in specific
contexts around the globe. We will examine how social boundaries, power relationships, and identities are
reorganized through gentrification; how class and racial disparity are produced and enforced; how the
social meaning of place impacts neighborhood change; and how communities have resisted gentrification.
Prerequisite: The department strongly recommends that Sociology/Anthropology 110 or 111 be taken prior
to enrolling in courses numbered 200 or above. 6 credits; SI, IS; Spring; Colin McLaughlin‐Alcock
SOAN 214 Neighborhoods and Cities: Inequalities and Identities Inequalities and identities are well
understood yet too often disconnected from the context of space and place. In this class, we discuss the
ways that neighborhoods and cities are sites of inequality as well as identity. Neighborhoods are linked to
the amount of wealth we hold; the schools we attend; the goods, services, and resources we have access
to; and who our neighbors are. Neighborhoods are also spaces where identities and community are
created, claimed, and contested. They can also be sites of conflict as they change through gentrification or
other processes that often reflect inequalities of power, resources, and status. In this course, special
attention will be paid to how race, gender and sexuality, and immigration shape inequalities and identity in
neighborhoods and cities. This course will also include an academic civic engagement component,
collaborating with local communities in Minnesota. Prerequisite: The department strongly recommends
that Sociology/Anthropology 110 or 111 be taken prior to enrolling in courses numbered 200 or above. 6
credits; SI, QRE, IDS, WR2; Fall; Daniel Williams
SOAN 222 Anthropology of Humor Laughter is found in all human societies, but we do not all laugh at the
same things. In this course we will discuss why, cross‐culturally, some things are funny and others are not,
and what forms humor may take (jokes, riddles, teasing, banter, clowning). We will look at such topics as
joking relationships, evolutionary aspects of laughter and smiling, sexual inequality in humor, ethnic humor,

388
and humor in religion and language. Some prior exposure to anthropology is desirable but not required.
The main prerequisite for the course is a serious sense of humor. Not open to students who have taken
Sociology/Anthropology 122. Prerequisite: Previous coursework in Sociology/Anthropology. 6 credits; SI;
Not offered 2022‐23
SOAN 225 Social Movements How is it that in specific historical moments ordinary people come together
and undertake collective struggles for justice in social movements such as Black Lives Matter, Me Too,
Standing Rock, immigrant, and LGBTQ rights? How have these movements theorized oppression, and what
has been their vision for liberation? What collective change strategies have they proposed and what
obstacles have they faced? We will explore specific case studies and use major sociological perspectives
theorizing the emergence of movements, repertoires of protest, collective identity formation, frame
alignment, and resource mobilization. We will foreground the intersectionality of gender, sexuality, race,
and class in these movements. 6 credits; SI, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
SOAN 226 Anthropology of Gender We all lead gendered lives, in our felt identities as well as through how
we are perceived, advantaged, and disadvantaged by others. This course examines gender and gender
relations from an anthropological perspective, centering and contextualizing the global human diversity of
gendered experiences. Key concepts such as gender, voice/mutedness, status, public and private spheres,
and the gendered division of labor—and their intellectual history—let us explore intriguing questions such
as how many genders there are, and whether gender is mutable. The course focuses on two areas: 1) the
role of sex, sexuality, and procreation in creating cultural notions of gender, and 2) the impacts of
colonialism, globalization, and economic underdevelopment on gender relations. Prerequisite: The
department strongly recommends that 110 or 111 be taken prior to enrolling in courses numbered 200 or
above. 6 credits; SI, WR2, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
SOAN 228 Public Sociology of Religion From the discipline’s earliest days, sociologists have considered
religion a fascinating and perplexing object of study. Classical sociologists devoted enormous attention to
the topic of religion, famously linking it to the development of capitalism and Western modernity (Weber),
to social solidarity and symbolic classification systems (Durkheim), to political passivity and social
conservatism (Marx), and to the varying forms of social, economic, and political life found in the world’s
great civilizations. This course focuses on special topics in the contemporary sociology of religion, with a
particular emphasis on religion in public and political life in American and global civil society. Prerequisite:
The department strongly recommends that Sociology/Anthropology 110 or 111 be taken prior to enrolling
in courses number 200 or above. 6 credits; SI, IS; Winter; Wes D Markofski
SOAN 233 Anthropology of Food Food is the way to a person's heart but perhaps even more interesting, the
window into a society's soul. Simply speaking understating a society's foodways is the best way to
comprehend the complexity between people, culture and nature. This course explores how anthropologists
use food to understand different aspects of human behavior, from food procurement and consumption
practices to the politics of nutrition and diets. In doing so we hope to elucidate how food is more than mere
sustenance and that often the act of eating is a manifestation of power, resistance, identity, and
community. 6 credits; SI, IS; Winter; Constanza C Ocampo‐Raeder
SOAN 239 Social Statistics What does it mean for something to be statistically significant? This course will
ask and answer this question by teaching social science students how to interpret data. This elementary
statistics course covers descriptive and inferential statistics up to regression. Whenever possible, we will
'flip' the classroom‐‐using class time for activities and problem sets, and using out of class time for online
lectures to introduce new material. We will focus on calculating and applying social statistics, rather than
statistical theory. No prior knowledge of statistics is required. 6 credits; FSR, QRE; Not offered 2022‐23

389
SOAN 240 Methods of Social Research The course is concerned with social scientific inquiry and
explanation, particularly with reference to sociology and anthropology. Topics covered include research
design, data collection, and analysis of data. Both quantitative and qualitative methods are considered.
Students will demonstrate their knowledge by developing a research proposal that is implementable.
Prerequisite: Sociology/Anthropology 110 or 111; Sociology/Anthropology 239, Mathematics 215 or
Statistics 120. 6 credits; SI, QRE, WR2; Spring; Annette M Nierobisz
SOAN 252 Growing up in an Aging Society Both the U.S. and global populations are trending toward a world
with far fewer young people than ever before. So, what does it mean to grow up in a rapidly aging society?
This course explores age, aging, and its various intersections with demographic characteristics including
gender, sexuality, race, and social class. We situate age and aging within the context of macro‐structural,
institutional, and micro‐everyday realms. Some topics we will examine include: media depictions and
stereotypes; interpersonal relationships and caregiving; the workplace and retirement; and both the
perceptions and inevitable realities of an aging population. 6 credits; NE, WR2, QRE, IDS; Fall; Annette M
Nierobisz
SOAN 256 Africa: Representation and Conflict Pairing classics in Africanist anthropology with contemporary
re‐studies, we explore changes in African societies and in the questions anthropologists have posed about
them. We address issues of representation and self‐presentation in written ethnographies as well as in
African portrait photography. We then turn from the visual to the invisible realm of African witchcraft.
Initiation rituals, war, and migration place selfhood and belonging back in this‐world contexts. In‐depth
case studies include, among others: the Cameroon Grassfields, the Bemba of Zambia, and the Nuer of South
Sudan. Prerequisite: The department strongly recommends that Sociology/Anthropology 110 or 111 be
taken prior to enrolling in courses numbered 200 or above. 6 credits; SI, IS, WR2; Winter; Pamela Feldman‐
Savelsberg
SOAN 257 Culture and Politics in India India is a region of immense diversity where more than one billion
people live. We will explore social structures in India‐‐through a focus on key areas of everyday life such as
family, religion, economy, systems of stratification and social movements. Close attention will be given to
religious nationalism, globalization and militarism as dominant trends affecting contemporary India. We will
consider: How has India been represented in the Western imagination and why do such representations
matter? What are the forces of modernity and tradition in India? What are the similarities and differences
in systems of stratification in India and the United States? 6 credits; SI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
SOAN 262 Anthropology of Health and Illness An ethnographic approach to beliefs and practices regarding
health and illness in numerous societies worldwide. This course examines patients, practitioners, and the
social networks and contexts through which therapies are managed to better understand medical systems
as well as the significance of the anthropological study of misfortune. Specific topics include the symbolism
of models of illness, the ritual management of misfortune and of life crisis events, the political economy of
health, therapy management, medical pluralism, and cross‐cultural medical ethics. Prerequisite: The
department strongly recommends that Sociology/Anthropology 110 or 111 be taken prior to enrolling in
courses numbered 200 or above. 6 credits; SI, WR2, IS; Winter; Pamela Feldman‐Savelsberg
SOAN 263 Terrorism In recent years, Muslim communities in Western countries have come to be seen as
national security threats. In tandem, efforts to stem the flow of Muslim migrants into the U.S. and Europe,
under the logic of combating terrorism, has shaped world events, from Trump’s election to Brexit. Through
a reading of works in political ethnography and the anthropology of religion, this course will examine the
presuppositions that inform discourses on Muslim migration as a threat, as well as the “countering violent
extremism” (CVE) programs directed at Muslim communities here in the U.S. We will look at the

390
assumption of an affinity between religion, particularly Islam, and violence that undergird CVE programs;
the tensions such programs expose between a liberal secular democracy’s commitment to religious
freedom and its aspiration to govern and reform religious traditions; and the culture of surveillance and the
marginalization of Muslim communities these programs spawn. Prerequisite: Previous courses in
anthropology or religion would offer helpful background, but are not required. 6 credits; SI, WR2, IDS; Not
offered 2022‐23
SOAN 272 Sociological Perspectives on Race and Ethnicity in the United States The purpose of the course is
to provide a broad overview of the scholarly literature on race and ethnicity from a sociological perspective,
paying particular attention to racial inequality in the U.S. When feasible, we will include research
to highlight how social class, citizenship, and to a lesser extent gender and sexuality, intersect with race and
ethnicity. Drawing on population‐based research and qualitative studies, we will explore several facets of
racial identity and racial categorization including (but not limited to): the evolution of racial categories and
the U.S. Census, the role of genetic testing and racial/ethnic identity formation, and racial disparities in
housing and health, and the movement toward multiracial identification. Prerequisite: The department
strongly recommends that Sociology/Anthropology 110 or 111 be taken prior to enrolling in courses
numbered 200 or above. 6 credits; SI, IDS, QRE; Not offered 2022‐23
SOAN 278 Urban Ethnography and the American Experience American sociology has a rich tradition of
focusing the ethnographic eye on the American experience. We will take advantage of this tradition to
encounter urban America through the ethnographic lens, expanding our social vision and investigating the
nature of race, place, meaning, interaction, and inequality in the U.S. While doing so, we will also explore
the unique benefits, challenges, and underlying assumptions of ethnographic research as a distinctive mode
of acquiring and communicating social knowledge. As such, this course offers both an immersion in the
American experience and an inquiry into the craft of ethnographic writing and research. Prerequisite: The
department strongly recommends that 110 or 111 be taken prior to enrolling in courses numbered 200 or
above. 6 credits; SI, IDS; Winter; Wes D Markofski
SOAN 288 Diversity, Democracy, Inequality in America Does social difference always lead to conflict and
inequality? Can we forge common ground with justice across deep differences? What forms of respect,
recognition, reciprocity, and redistribution do democratic citizens owe one another? We will explore these
and related questions through a roughly equal mix of democratic theory and empirical studies of
race/class/gender/religion diverse grassroots democratic movements in the U.S. We will consider the
demands and challenges of "different types of difference" (racial‐ethnic, gender‐sexuality, class‐culture,
citizenship, language, and religion) for fighting inequity and pursuing ethical democracy in the United States
(and beyond). Prerequisite: The department strongly recommends that Sociology/Anthropology 110 or 111
be taken prior to enrolling in courses number 200 or above. 6 credits; SI, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
SOAN 307 Human Trafficking The FBI receives praise and criticism for shutting down Backpage.com. A
conspiracy theory about online furniture company Wayfair goes viral. Jeffrey Epstein is arrested. What do
these disparate events have in common? They are all recent incidents that raise the question: when and
how will the United States respond to the crime of human trafficking? In the past several decades activists
and governments around the world have been increasingly focused on addressing human trafficking.
However, there is often disagreement about the best way to understand and attempt to prevent a crime
that is tied to a complex host of social, political, and cultural forces. This course will cover how human
trafficking is defined, measured and studied as well as the cultural and political factors that affect how it
occurs and how we try to respond to it. Topics will include labor, sex and organ trafficking, globalization,
migration and inequality, and the criminalization/decrminalization of sex‐based labor. Prerequisite: The

391
department strongly recommends that Sociology/Anthropology 110 or 111 be taken prior to enrolling in
courses numbered 200 or above. 6 credits; SI, IDS; Spring; Elizabeth H Trudeau
SOAN 310 Sociology of Mass Incarceration Since the 1980s, the United States criminal justice system has
embarked on a social experiment we now call, “mass incarceration.” The outcome – unprecedented rates
of imprisonment, particularly in BIPOC communities – has had devastating consequences for individuals,
families, neighborhoods, and American society. This course explores the causes and consequences of mass
incarceration. Potential topics include: race, class, gender, and age in the prison system; the impacts of
incarceration on children and intimate partners who get left behind; punishment strategies such as solitary
confinement and the death penalty; the lucrative business of the prison industrial complex; and the
promise of prison abolition. Prerequisite: Prerequisites: The department strongly recommends that
Sociology/Anthropology 110 or 111 be taken prior to enrolling in courses numbered 200 or above. 6 credits;
SI, WR2, QRE, IDS; Winter; Annette M Nierobisz
SOAN 313 Woke Nature: Towards an Anthropology of Non‐Human Beings The core of anthropological
thought has been organized around the assumption that the production of complex cultural systems is
reserved to the domain of the human experience. While scholars have contested this assumption for years,
there is an emerging body of scholarship that proposes expanding our understandings of culture, and the
ability to produce meaning in the world, to include non‐human beings (e.g. plants, wildlife, micro‐
organisms, mountains). This course explores ethnographic works in this field and contextualizes insights
within contemporary conversations pertaining to our relationship with nature, public health, and social
justice movements that emerge within decolonized frameworks. Prerequisite: The department strongly
recommends that Sociology/Anthropology 110 or 111 be taken prior to enrolling in courses numbered 200
or above. 6 credits; SI, IS, WR2; Spring; Constanza C Ocampo‐Raeder
SOAN 314 Contemporary Issues in Critical Criminology In this course we examine contemporary
criminological issues from the critical perspectives offered by sociologists. Topics under examination
include: how crime is conventionally defined, measured, and theorized; societal reactions to crime; and
punishment of those who are deemed criminal. While exploring these topics, we will consider the impact of
race, gender, and social class in shaping individuals’ interactions with the U.S. criminal justice system.
Students will also seek a cross‐national comparative understanding. Course readings primarily consist of
theoretical and ethnographic accounts supplemented with statistical summaries. Prerequisite: The
department strongly recommends that Sociology/Anthropology 110 or 111 be taken prior to enrolling in
courses numbered 200 or above. 6 credits; SI, IDS, WR2, QRE; Not offered 2022‐23
SOAN 322 Buddhist Studies India Program: Contemporary Buddhist Culture This course introduces students
to the complexity and plurality of Buddhist traditions that have flourished in diverse societies and cultures
in the modern era. This course enables students to sympathetically understand and critically investigate
various Buddhist traditions and their historically and culturally specific configurations of philosophical
beliefs, cultural values, everyday practices, social institutions, and personal experiences. Focusing on
Buddhist traditions of South and Southeast Asia, Japan, and Tibet, we explore topics including syncretism
and popular religion, monasticism, gender, economic development, social movements, political violence,
and religious revival. Students expand their research skills in anthropology through field assignments in
Bodh Gaya. Prerequisite: Acceptance into the Buddhist Studies Program required. 7‐8 credits; NE, IS; Fall;
Arthur P McKeown
SOAN 323 Mother Earth: Women, Development and the Environment Why are so many sustainable
development projects anchored around women's cooperatives? Why is poverty depicted as having a
woman's face? Is the solution to the environmental crisis in the hands of women the nurturers? From

392
overly romantic notions of stewardship to the feminization of poverty, this course aims to evaluate
women's relationships with local environments and development initiatives. The course uses
anthropological frameworks to evaluate case studies from around the world. Prerequisite: The department
strongly recommends that Sociology/Anthropology 110 or 111 be taken prior to enrolling in courses
numbered 200 or above. 6 credits; SI, WR2, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
SOAN 325 Sociology of Adoption and Assisted Reproduction Where do babies come from? Whereas once
the answer was relatively straight forward, the growth of assisted reproductive technologies (ART) and
adoption has changed the field of potential answers. Nowadays babies can come from birthmothers, egg
donors, and surrogates. In this course we will examine the meaning and making of families across these
different types of formations and contextualize the popularity of ART relative to the decrease in adoption.
We will take a sociological approach to analyzing these issues, paying particular attention to questions
surrounding women's rights, baby "markets," and the racialization of children placed for adoption in the
U.S. Prerequisite: Prior Sociology/Anthropology course or instructor permission. 6 credits; SI, IDS; Not
offered 2022‐23
SOAN 326 Ecology and Anthropology Tanzania Program: Cultural Anthropology of East Africa The course
introduces students to East Africa‐‐its geography, people groups, and their cultures. The focus will be on
the peoples of Tanzania and their linguistic groupings. We shall look at what scholars and the citizens
themselves say about their origins, social, economic, ecological, and modern conditions. The course
explores the history, social structure, politics, livelihood and ecology, gender issues, and the changes taking
place among the Maasai, Arusha, Meru, Chagga, and Hadzabe cultural groups. Homestays, guest speakers,
and excursions in northern Tanzania offer students and instructors enviable interactions with these groups
and insights into their culture and socio‐ecology. Prerequisite: One Anthropology, Biology or Environmental
Studies course or instructor consent. 7‐8 credits; NE, IS; Fall; Anna B Estes
SOAN 330 Sociological Thought and Theory Many thinkers have contributed to the development of
sociology as an intellectual discipline and mode of social inquiry; however, few have had the influence of
Emile Durkheim, Karl Marx, and Max Weber. This course focuses on influential texts and ideas generated by
these and other theorists from sociology’s “classical era,” how these texts and ideas are put to use by
contemporary sociologists, and on more recent theoretical developments and critical perspectives that
have influenced the field. Prerequisite: The department strongly recommends that Sociology/Anthropology
110 or 111 be taken prior to enrolling in courses numbered 200 or above. 6 credits; SI, WR2; Fall; Wes D
Markofski
SOAN 331 Anthropological Thought and Theory Our ways of perceiving and acting in the world emerge
simultaneously from learned and shared orientations of long duration, and from specific contexts and
contingencies of the moment. This applies to the production of anthropological ideas and of anthropology
as an academic discipline. This course examines anthropological theory by placing the observers and the
observed in the same comparative historical framework, subject to the ethnographic process and to
historical conditions in and out of academe. We seek to understand genealogies of ideas, building on
and/or reacting to previous anthropological approaches. We highlight the diversity of voices who thought
up these ideas, and have influenced anthropological thought through time. We attend to the intellectual
and political context in which anthropologists conducted research, wrote, and published their works, as
well as which voices did/did not reach academic audiences. The course thus traces the development of the
core issues, central debates, internecine battles, and diversity of anthropological thought and of
anthropologists that have animated anthropology since it first emerged as a distinct field of inquiry to
present‐day efforts at intellectual decolonization. Prerequisite: Socilogy/Anthropology 110 or 111, and at

393
least one 200‐ or 300‐level SOAN course, or permission of instructor. 6 credits; SI, IS, WR2; Winter;
Constanza C Ocampo‐Raeder
SOAN 333 Environmental Anthropology Can we learn to use resources sustainably? Are there people in the
world that know how to manage their environment appropriately? What are the causes behind
environmental degradation? These questions are commonly asked in public and academic forums but what
discussions often overlook is the fact that these are fundamentally social questions and thus social analysis
is needed to understand them fully. This course aims at exploring key issues of human/nature interactions
by using anthropological critiques and frameworks of analysis to show how culture is a critical variable to
understanding these interactions in all their complexity. Prerequisite: The department strongly
recommends that Sociology/Anthropology 110 or 111 be taken prior to enrolling in courses numbered 200
or above. 6 credits; SI, WR2, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
SOAN 335 The Politics of Public Art In this class we will explore the politics of public art. While we will look
at the political messaging of public art, we will also seek to understand how public art, through its
integration into a social geography, has a political impact beyond its meaning. We will see how art claims
public space and structures social action, how art shapes social groups, and how art channels economic
flows or government power. By tracing the ways that art is situated in public space, we will examine how
art enters into urban contest and global inequality. For the purposes of this class, we will focus primarily
(but not exclusively) on public art in urban settings. Class activity will include exploration of public art and
students will be introduced to key concepts of urban spatial analysis to help interrogate this art.
Prerequisite: The department strongly recommends that Sociology/Anthropology 110 or 111 be taken prior
to enrolling in courses numbered 200 or above. 6 credits; SI; Winter; Colin McLaughlin‐Alcock
SOAN 343 Advanced Ethnographic Workshop This advanced methods course is designed to have students
think about the complexities of ethnographic fieldwork by showcasing a powerful and rigorous mode of
inquiry that informs societal questions in unique ways. The main goals are to explore classic ethnographies
with an eye towards methods and experience ethnographic research in its entirety: from exploratory
observations, into the process of defining cultural hypotheses, to the coding of various kinds of qualitative
and quantitative ethnographic evidence. Ethnographic methods explored include: participant observation,
semi‐structured interviewing techniques, cultural mapping, pile sorting activities, photo‐essays, and
network analysis. Prerequisite: The department strongly recommends that 110 or 111 be taken prior to
enrolling in courses numbered 200 or above. 6 credits; SI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
SOAN 353 Ethnography of Latin America This course explores the origins and development of contemporary
lived experiences in Latin America as interpreted through ethnographic works in anthropology. We will
examine and analyze the structural processes that have shaped contact among indigenous, European, and
non‐European immigrants (e.g. African and Asian peoples) in Latin America since the Conquest and through
colonial periods to understand today's Latin American societies. We will pay special attention to the
impacts of global capitalist expansion and state formation, sites of resilience and resistance, as well as the
movement of Latin American peoples throughout the world today. Course themes will address gender,
identity, social organization, indigeneity, immigration, social inequality and environment. Prerequisite: The
department strongly recommends that Sociology/Anthropology 110 or 111 be taken prior to enrolling in
courses numbered 200 or above. 6 credits; SI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
SOAN 395 Ethnography of Reproduction This seminar explores the meanings of reproductive beliefs and
practices in comparative perspective. Using ethnographies, it explores the relation between human and
social reproduction. It focuses on (but is not limited to) ethnographic examples from the United
States/Canada and from sub‐Saharan Africa (societies with relatively low fertility and high utilization of

394
technology and societies with mostly high fertility and low utilization of technology). Topics examined
include fertility and birth, fertility rites, new reproductive technologies, abortion, population control,
infertility, child survival and child loss. Prerequisite: Sociology/Anthropology 110 or 111 and 226 or 262; or
instructor permission. 6 credits; SI, WR2, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
SOAN 396 Advanced Sociological and Anthropological Writing This course explores different genres of
writing and different audiences for writing in the social sciences, focusing particular attention on scholarly
articles published in professional journals in sociology and anthropology. To that end, students both analyze
sociological and anthropological articles regarding commonalities and differences in academic writing in our
two sister disciplines. Students work on their own academic writing process (with the help of peer‐review
and instructor feedback). The writing itself is broken down into component elements on which students
practice and revise their work. Prerequisite: Completion of Sociology/Anthropology 240 or submission of a
topic statement in the preceding spring term and submission of a comps thesis proposal on the first day of
fall term. Senior Sociology/Anthropology major or instructor permission. 6 credits; S/CR/NC; SI, WR2; Fall;
Pamela Feldman‐Savelsberg
SOAN 400 Integrative Exercise Senior sociology/anthropology majors fulfill the integrative exercise by
writing a senior thesis on a topic approved by the department. Students must enroll in six credits to write
the thesis, spread as the student likes over Fall, Winter, and Spring terms. The process begins with the
submission of a topic statement in the preceding spring term and concludes with a public presentation in
spring of the senior year. Please consult the Sociology and Anthropology website for a full description. 1‐6
credit; S/NC; Fall, Winter, Spring; Wes D Markofski, Pamela Feldman‐Savelsberg, Liz Y Raleigh, Constanza C
Ocampo‐Raeder, Annette M Nierobisz

Other Courses Pertinent to Sociology/Anthropology:







ARCN 111 Archaeology of the Americas (not offered in 2022‐23)
ARCN 211 Coercion and Exploitation: Material Histories of Labor
ARCN 246 Archaeological Methods & Lab
ARCN 395 Archaeology: Science, Ethics, Nationalism and Cultural Property (not offered in 2022‐23)
GWSS 200 Gender, Sexuality & the Pursuit of Knowledge
GWSS 398 Capstone: Transnational Feminist Activism (not offered in 2022‐23)

South Asian Studies Minor
South Asia, which contains nearly a quarter of the world's people, refers to the countries comprising
the South Asian subcontinent: Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Nepal, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Maldives,
and sometimes Afghanistan, Myanmar, and Tibet. The minor consists of a program of study
combining language training, off-campus study, required core courses in various disciplines;
supporting courses, including a designated capstone course. The purpose of the minor is to provide
cross-cultural interdisciplinary understanding of a complex civilization that is both ancient and
modern, and of great significance in the contemporary world.
Requirements for the South Asian Studies Minor
A total of 42 credits, with at least 6 credits drawn from each of the three ASST distribution areas
(Literary/Artistic Analysis; Humanistic Inquiry; Social Inquiry)

395

Normally, at least one term of off-campus study in South Asia
Usually, the closest equivalent to one year of study of a South Asian language, obtained through
one or more of the following: off-campus study; summer programs at colleges, universities, or
institutes; independent study at Carleton; native proficiency


Core Courses: 18 credits from among the following; courses must be from at least two distribution
areas:
o Literary/Artistic Analysis
 ENGL 250 Indian Fiction 1880‐1980 (not offered in 2022‐23)
 ENGL 251 Contemporary Indian Fiction (not offered in 2022‐23)
o Humanistic Inquiry
 HIST 161 From Mughals to Mahatma Gandhi: An Introduction to Modern Indian
History
 HIST 270 Nuclear Nations: India and Pakistan as Rival Siblings
 RELG 153 Introduction to Buddhism
 RELG 155 Hinduism: An Introduction
o Social Inquiry
 SOAN 257 Culture and Politics in India (not offered in 2022‐23)



Supporting Courses: 24 credits from among the following; courses must be from at least two
distribution areas:
o Literary and Artistic Analysis
 DANC 265 Performing the Orient
 ENGL 245 Bollywood Nation
 ENGL 251 Contemporary Indian Fiction (not offered in 2022‐23)
 ENGL 252 Caribbean Fiction (not offered in 2022‐23)
 LCST 101 Globalizaton & Local Responses in India Program: Elementary Hindi
 LCST 101 Buddhist Studies India Program: Elementary Hindi
 LCST 103 Buddhist Studies India Program: Intermediate Hindi
 MUSC 180 Raga: Vocal or Instrumental Study of Hindustani Music
 MUSC 181 Sitar
 MUSC 248 Music of South Asia (not offered in 2022‐23)
 MUSC 280 Raga: Vocal or Instrumental Study of Hindustani Music
 MUSC 281 Sitar
o Humanities
 ASST 130 Globalization & Local Responses in India Program: Tourism and
Development in India
 ASST 319 Buddhist Studies India Program: History of South Asian Buddhism
 ASST 391 Buddhist Studies India Program: Independent Study Project
 HIST 268 Globalization & Local Responses in India Program: History, Globalization,
and Politics in Modern India
 HIST 270 Nuclear Nations: India and Pakistan as Rival Siblings
 PHIL 318 Buddhist Studies India Program: Buddhist Philosophy
 RELG 122 Introduction to Islam (not offered in 2022‐23)
 RELG 153 Introduction to Buddhism
 RELG 155 Hinduism: An Introduction
 RELG 237 Yoga: Religion, History, Practice (not offered in 2022‐23)
 RELG 280 The Politics of Sex in Asian Religion (not offered in 2022‐23)
 RELG 283 Mysticism and Gender (not offered in 2022‐23)

396





o



RELG 289 Global Religions in Minnesota (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 359 Buddhist Studies India Program: Buddhist Meditation Traditions
RELG 362 Spirit Possession (not offered in 2022‐23)
RELG 365 Mysticism (not offered in 2022‐23)
Social Inquiry
 ECON 240 Microeconomics of Development
 ECON 241 Growth and Development
 POSC 120 Democracy and Dictatorship
 POSC 241 Ethnic Conflict (not offered in 2022‐23)
 POSC 378 Political Economy & Ecology of Southeast Asia: Social Changes in
Southeast Asia (not offered in 2022‐23)
 POSC 379 Political Economy and Ecology of S.E. Asia: Diversity of Social Ecological
Systems in Southeast Asia (not offered in 2022‐23)
 SOAN 322 Buddhist Studies India Program: Contemporary Buddhist Culture

Capstone Course:
o ENGL 251 Contemporary Indian Fiction (not offered in 2022‐23)

Courses taken on off-campus programs in South Asia may be applied to the minor.

Spanish
Language Courses
Language courses 101, 102, 103, 204 are a sequential series of courses designed to prepare the
student in the basic language skills (listening, speaking, reading, and writing) through the study of
grammar, literature, and culture, and/or to provide the foundation for pursuing advanced work in
language and literature. Spanish 205, 206 and 207 are designed to develop the student's spoken and
written mastery of the language through compositions and intensive oral work based on cultural and
literary topics. Admission to these courses is determined either by appropriate high school CEEB or
Carleton placement test scores or by completion of the previous course in the sequence with a grade
of C- or better.
Advanced Courses
We examine texts for both their aesthetic and human values. Our literature, film and cultural
courses have a number of goals: to refine and expand students' linguistic ability, to broaden their
cultural understanding, to improve their ability to engage in critical analysis, to enhance their
knowledge of history and criticism, and to help students better understand themselves and the
human condition. In our discussions, we address universal themes and concerns, but we also try to
uncover what is peculiarly Hispanic or Latin American about the works.
Parish International House: The Spanish Language Associate organizes numerous cultural
activities at Parish House (films, discussions, game nights, cooking gatherings, holiday
celebrations) that provide opportunities for speaking Spanish on campus. Students participate in
numerous cultural activities in Parish International House organized by the Spanish Language
Associate who is a native speaker.

397

Programs Abroad: Participation in a Carleton or in another approved foreign study program is
highly recommended for students majoring or minoring in the above areas. Students interested in
study abroad should consult the section on international off-campus programs, and discuss
alternatives with faculty in Spanish and with the Director of Off-Campus Studies.
Requirements for the Spanish Major
The Spanish major requires 66 credits beyond SPAN 103. 60 in Spanish at least 30 of which must
be taken in Spanish at the 300-level.





18 credits in Latin American Literature, film, and/or culture at the 200 or 300 level
18 credits in Peninsular literature, film, and/or culture at the 200 or 300 level
6 credits in literature of film in translation from a language other than Spanish
18 credits in Spanish from courses number 204 or above

o



Note: Students who place out of Spanish 204 via language placement exam, AP scores, or
other prematriculation work must still complete 66 credits
6 credits of Spanish 400

Majors should complete no more than twelve credits in the sequence 204-219, and no more than
eighteen credits from the courses number 220-299. A limit of three 200-level literature courses
within the range of 220-299 guarantees that our students will proceed in a timely fashion to the
upper division seminars and yet allows both flexibility and transition. All of our courses demand
that students learn and apply critical skills for literary and cultural analysis. However, it is at the
300-level that our majors complete a paper that can often form the basis for the senior
comprehensive project, the capstone experience in our major. All majors need to have completed
two 300 level courses by spring term of their junior year.
We limit the number of non-Carleton OCS credits that can be applied to the Major to a maximum of
12, and these credits do not substitute for the 300-level courses that students must complete on
campus or through the departmental OCS programs.
Requirements for the Spanish Minor
Students who pursue the Minor in Spanish are required to complete 36 credits with a C- or better
beyond the 103 level.





All courses must be taught in Spanish.
Spanish 204 may count toward the minor.
At least 12 credits in upper‐level literature courses (300‐395) are required.
We limit the number of non‐Carleton OCS credits that can be applied to the Minor to a maximum of
12, and these credits do not substitute for the 12 credits at the 300‐level that students must
complete on campus or through the departmental OCS programs.

Students who place out of 204 must still complete the six-course requirement (36 credits).

398

Spanish Courses
SPAN 101 Elementary Spanish This course introduces the basic structures of the Spanish language, everyday
vocabulary and cultural situations. Students practice all four skills (reading, writing, listening and speaking)
in Spanish. Taught five days a week in Spanish. Prerequisite: none (Placement score for students with
previous experience in Spanish). 6 credits; NE; Fall; Ariel Arjona Hernandez, Claudia M Lange, Ingrid Luna
SPAN 102 Elementary Spanish This course introduces complex sentences and various tenses and short
literary and cultural texts. Students practice all four skills (reading, writing, listening and speaking) in
Spanish. Taught five days a week in Spanish. Prerequisite: Spanish 101 or equivalent. 6 credits; NE; Winter;
Claudia M Lange, Vera R Coleman, Beatriz Pariente‐Beltrán, Fernando I Contreras Flamand, Héctor Melo
Ruiz
SPAN 103 Intermediate Spanish This course continues the study of complex sentence patterns and reviews
basic patterns in greater depth, partly through the discussion of authentic short stories. Students practice
all four skills (reading, writing, listening and speaking) in Spanish. Taught five days a week in Spanish.
Prerequisite: Spanish 102 or equivalent. 6 credits; NE; Spring; Vera R Coleman, Palmar Álvarez‐Blanco,
Ingrid Luna, Fernando I Contreras Flamand, Claudia M Lange
SPAN 204 Intermediate Spanish Through discussion of literary and cultural texts and films, as well as a
review of grammar, this course aims to help students acquire greater skill and confidence in both oral and
written expression. Taught three days a week in Spanish. Prerequisite: Spanish 103 or equivalent. 6 credits;
NE; Fall, Winter; Vera R Coleman, Jorge Brioso, Héctor Melo Ruiz, Silvia López, Beatriz Pariente‐Beltrán,
Fernando I Contreras Flamand, Humberto R Huergo
SPAN 205 Conversation and Composition A course designed to develop the student's oral and written
mastery of Spanish. Advanced study of grammar. Compositions and conversations based on cultural and
literary topics. There is also an audio‐video component focused on current affairs. Prerequisite: Spanish 204
or equivalent. 6 credits; LA, IS; Winter, Spring; Humberto R Huergo, Jorge Brioso, Palmar Álvarez‐Blanco
SPAN 208 Coffee and News An excellent opportunity to brush up your Spanish while learning about current
issues in Spain and Latin America. The class meets only once a week for an hour. Class requirements include
reading specific sections of Spain's leading newspaper, El País, everyday on the internet (El País), and then
meeting once a week to exchange ideas over coffee with a small group of students like yourself.
Prerequisite: Spanish 204 or equivalent. 2 credits; S/CR/NC; LA, IS; Fall, Winter, Spring; Silvia López, Jorge
Brioso
SPAN 209 Radio and News in Spanish Are you interested in talking about current news while practicing your
oral skills in Spanish? Have you ever considered participating in a radio program? This course is an excellent
way to keep in touch with your Spanish while collaborating with “El Super Barrio Latino” a radio program
conducted by the Latinx community of Northfield. In each program we will explore international and
domestic news and we will interview people in our community. Relying on international newspapers,
students will discuss common topics and themes representing a wide array of regions. (Language of
conversation is Spanish) Prerequisite: Spanish 204 or equivalent. 2 credits; HI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
SPAN 210 Spanish Literature and Art through Graphic Novels This course serves as a bridge
between beginning (204‐208) and advanced courses (220‐300) in the Department of Spanish. Its main
objective is to improve your written and oral skills by looking at some of the best examples of the graphic
novel in Spain in recent years, including: Vida y muerte de Lorca (biography), Las Meninas (art history), Yo,
asesino (detective novel), Homenaje a Cataluña (Spanish Civil War), Náufragos (urban tales of Madrid and

399
Barcelona), Ardalén (autobiography), and others. Students will be expected to write several short
compositions and to give oral presentations applying specific grammar skills in the context of texts and
paintings examined in class. Prerequisite: Spanish 204 or equivalent. 6 credits; LA, IS; Spring; Humberto R
Huergo
SPAN 212 Madrid Program: Navigating Madrid This is an intense grammar/cultural workshop intended to
help program participants navigate successfully through everyday situations such as ordering food at a
restaurant, getting a haircut, describing your symptoms to a doctor, buying clothes or simply hanging out
with your new Spanish friends. The course has two components—one strictly grammatical (“how do you
say X exactly?”) and another cultural (“is it right to use the informal tú with a waiter?”). 2 credits; S/CR/NC;
NE; Fall; Humberto R Huergo
SPAN 213 Pragmatics and Conversation in Context Pragmatics studies the relationship between language
and context. Learning conversational skills in a second language requires students to linguistically adapt to
a range of contexts, hence the field of pragmatics provides an ideal theoretical framework for a
conversation class. For example, students learn about essential cultural and linguistic differences between
English and Spanish with regard to conversational styles, politeness and verbal interaction in general.
Prerequisite: Spanish 205. 2 credits; HI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
SPAN 218 Introduction to Latin American Cinema This course will introduce the student to several
production systems and aesthetic traditions in Latin American cinema, from silent cinema to current Netflix
productions, allowing students to engage cinematic debates by situating them in their national, regional
and global cultural contexts. Be prepared to be immersed in the moving image and its cultural significance
through the viewing of many films and critical work on them. Recommended as a foundation course for
further study. Prerequisite: Spanish 204 or the equivalent. 6 credits; LA, IS; Spring; Héctor Melo Ruiz
SPAN 220 Racism, Immigration, and Gender in Contemporary Latin American Narrative This course focuses
on contemporary short stories and short novels. We will read some of the most relevant living authors from
Latin America including Carlos Gamerro, Pilar Quintana, Kike Ferrari, Yeniter Poleo, Antonio José Ponte,
among others. This will expose students to the most pressing issues in today's Latin America, ranging from
gender, violence, racism, and inmigration. We will interview at least one of the authors read during the
term and discuss the social implications of their literature in today's world. Prerequisite: Spanish 204 or
equivalent. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
SPAN 225 Exile in Literature and History “Exiles" —claims Palestinian exile Edward Said— "are always
eccentrics who feel their difference as some sort of orphanhood while defending zealously their refusal to
belong.” This course examines four different moments in the history of Spanish exile: the mass expulsion of
Jews in 1492, that of moriscos (Moors converted to Christianity) in 1609, the Liberal exile in 1823, and the
Republican exile at the end of the Spanish Civil War in 1939. Prerequisite: Spanish 204 or equivalent. 6
credits; NE, WR2, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
SPAN 227 Muslims, Christians, and Jews in Early Modern Spain Muslims and Jews lived in the country we
now call "Spain" for nearly 1000 years before they were both expelled in 1492 and 1609. No other
European nation has ever experienced this kind of cultural hybridity. This course examines the tense
coexistence of all three cultures between the twelfth and the seventeenth centuries, as reflected in
historical documents, civil law, literature, and art. Readings include: Hispano‐Arabic women poets mocking
the Koran, Sephardic literature, Hispano‐Arabic gay poetry, letters from Queen Isabella defending “her”
Jews, the expulsion of Jews as narrated by Jewish chroniclers of the time, Núñez de
Muley’s Memorandum in defense of moriscos (Spanish Muslims), Father Agustín Salucio’s stunning plea for

400
an amnesty that would stop the persecution of Spanish Jews, Cervantes, and others. If you thought Muslims
were newcomers to Europe, think again—you are in for a ride. Prerequisite: Spanish 204 or above. 6
credits; HI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
SPAN 229 Madrid Program: Current Issues in Spanish Politics This course offers a fresh look of Spain's
current political and economic life. Discussion topics include the rise of Podemos and the new Spanish
political scene, the Catalan separatist movement, political corruption, illegal immigration, and the role of
the European Union. Prerequisite: Spanish 205 or higher and acceptance in Madrid OCS Program. 6 credits;
SI, IS; Fall; Humberto R Huergo
SPAN 230 Madrid Program: Urban Transformation and Cultural Tensions in a Global City This course
proposes an exploration of Madrid in a historical perspective to track those tensions between the
persistence of the city and the pulsion of modernity, between the local traditions and peculiarities and the
influences arriving as an effect of globalization. In this journey we will study the transformation of Madrid
from Middle Ages to the present, focusing on the struggles and strategies of the community adapting to the
new circumstances. In more general terms, we will understand Madrid's way of life, the problems and
particularities of its community, and as well as an introduction to the threats to urban society in a global
world. Prerequisite: Spanish 205 and participation in Madrid Program. 6 credits; HI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
SPAN 242 Introduction to Latin American Literature An introductory course to reading major texts in
Spanish provides an historical survey of the literary movements within Latin American literature from the
pre‐Hispanic to the contemporary period. Recommended as a foundation course for further study. Not
open to seniors. Prerequisite: Spanish 204 or proficiency. 6 credits; LA, IS; Winter; Silvia López
SPAN 244 Spain Today: Recent Changes through Narrative and Film Since the death of Franco in 1975, Spain
has undergone huge political, socio‐economic, and cultural transformations. Changes in the traditional roles
of women, the legalization of gay marriage, the decline of the Catholic church, the increase of immigrants,
Catalan and Basque nationalisms, and the integration of Spain in the European Union, have all challenged
the definition of a national identity. Through contemporary narrative and film, this course will examine
some of these changes and how they contribute to the creation of what we call Spain today. Prerequisite:
Spanish 204 or equivalent. 6 credits; LA, IS; Fall; Palmar Álvarez‐Blanco
SPAN 245 On Cannibals, Witches, and Zombies Latin American culture is populated with monsters. As
manifestations of racial, gendered, and class difference, they can be found in artistic production all over the
hemisphere. This course explores these narratives, primarily focusing on the cannibal, the witch, and the
zombie as representations of difference, fear, and colonialism in Latin America. We will analyze literary and
visual production from the sixteenth century to the present in order to strengthen students’ analytical and
written skills in Spanish. Emphasis will be given to methods to ‘reading’ our materials, to learning how to
approach those sources from different cultural and critical perspectives, as well as to produce written
reactions and analysis. Prerequisite: Spanish 204 or equivalent. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
SPAN 262 Myth and History in Central American Literature In this course we study the relationship between
myth and history in Central America since its origins in the Popol Vuh, the sacred texts of the Mayans until
the period of the post‐civil wars era. The course is organized in a chronological manner. We will study, in
addition to the Popol Vuh, the chronicles of Alvarado, some poems by Rubén Darío and Francisco Gavidia,
some of the writings of Miguel Ãngel Asturias and Salarrué. The course will end with a study of critical
visions of the mythical presented by more contemporary authors such as Roque Dalton and Luis de
Lión. Prerequisite: Spanish 204 or equivalent. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23

401
SPAN 263 History of Human Rights This course proposes a genealogical study of the concept of Human
Rights. The course will begin with the debates in sixteenth century Spain about the theological, political and
juridical rights of "Indians." The course will cover four centuries and the following topics will be discussed:
the debates about poverty in sixteenth century Spain; the birth of the concept of tolerance in the
eighteenth century; the creation of the modern political constitution in the United States, France and Spain;
the debates about women's rights, abortion and euthanasia, etc. Prerequisite: Spanish 204 or equivalent. 6
credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
SPAN 277 The Poem as Artifact: Art and Work in Contemporary Spanish American Poetry Poetry will be
studied as an activity that shares a common ground with other social practices. In particular, we will
examine particular moments and cases of Latin American literature in which the poem (the making of
poetry and the form of the text) has been conceived in its connection with work, that is, with the process of
transformation of materiality into specific "objects," involving a necessary social use of time and space. We
will explore this topic starting with Modernismo and, after covering the Vanguardias, will get to some key
developments from the 1960s to present. Prerequisite: Spanish 204 or equivalent. 6 credits; LA; Not offered
2022‐23
SPAN 301 Greek and Christian Tragedy This course is a comparative study of classical and Christian tragedy
from Sophocles to Valle Inclán and from Aristotle to Nietzsche. Classes alternate between lectures and
group discussions. Course requisites include a midterm exam and a final paper. All readings are in Spanish,
Sophocles and Aristotle included. Prerequisite: Spanish 205 or above. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
SPAN 318 Islamic Spain Muslims conquered Spain in 711 and lived in the country roughly until 1614. This
course will examine the Islamic origins of Spain from a variety of disciplines, including literature, religion,
history, and art history. Topics covered include:Hispano‐Arabic literature, the fall of Granada, the
repression of Moriscos under Philip II, aljamiado literature (literature written in Spanish with Arabic
characters), the expulsion of Moriscos, and the diaspora in Tunisia. We will also devote two weeks to the
study of the representation of Turks, Muslims, and Moriscos in Cervantes’ plays and novels, including
several chapters of his famous Don Quixote. All texts are in Spanish, including Arab sources by Ibn Hazm,
Wallada, Muhya, and other Hispano‐Arabic and Morisco writers. Prerequisite: Spanish 205 or above. 6
credits; LA, WR2, IS; Spring
SPAN 319 Works on Work: Films and Literature on Labor in Latin America This course studies the cultural
representation of labor in Latin America. It focuses on the racial division of labor over the colonial,
industrial, and neoliberal periods. We will analyze a wide range of visual and literary representations of
Native, Black and women workers under the Encomienda labor system; peonages during the period of
independence and specific national contexts (i.e. rubber tapper); industrial workers throughout the
twentieth century (blue‐collar workers); as well as the role of unemployment and precarized labor within
the context of globalization. Prerequisite: Spanish 205 or above. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
SPAN 321 Murder as a Fine Art: The Detective Novel in Latin America We will study the socio‐historical
factors that gave rise to the genre as well as some of its classical predecessors (Poe, Chandler). We will then
turn our attention to some prominent heirs of this genre in Latin America (Borges, Piglia, Bolaño) and end
by studying why in contemporary Central American literature the genre is enjoying a resurgence (Menjívar,
Castellanos Moya and Rey Rosa). We will study the specific traits the genre has adopted in Latin America
and how it has become a mirror that often reflects the political and social realities confronting the region,
particularly in Central America. Prerequisite: Spanish 205 or above. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23

402
SPAN 328 The Contemporary Spanish Fictional Essay In this course we will study the various meanings of
what has been labeled, aesthetically and sociologically, as the Post‐Modernist age, or Late Modernity. We
will also study the relationship between "postmodernism," the late‐capitalist era and what has been called
the "culture of contentment" or "culture of well‐being." In addition, we will attempt to understand the
interactions that exist between consumer culture, market societies and dominant ideology. To develop this
theme we will focus on Spain, but will also continually establish cross‐cultural comparisons with other
countries. This course addresses many different genres (e.g. fictional essays, documentaries, gag cartoons,
graphic novels, comics). The course also features evening films and guest lectures. Prerequisite: Spanish
205 or 207. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
SPAN 330 The Invention of the Modern Novel: Cervantes' Don Quijote Among other things, Don Quijote is a
"remake," an adaptation of several literary models popular at the time the picaresque novel, the chivalry
novel, the sentimental novel, the Byzantine novel, the Italian novella, etc. This course will examine the ways
in which Cervantes transformed these models to create what is considered by many the first "modern"
novel in European history. Prerequisite: Spanish 205 or above. 6 credits; LA, IS; Fall; Jorge Brioso
SPAN 345 Culture, Capitalism and the Commons Have you ever wondered if not capitalism, then what? In
this course we will critically approach the historical background, the causes and, most importantly, the
consequences of the civil and ecological crisis unleashed globally in 2008. Both in its origin and its
consequences, this crisis went beyond the financial field, extending into the realms of politics, economics,
culture, media and ecology. In light of this context, we will take a transdisciplinary approach to the study of
capitalist culture and analyze the main changes that have developed from the cycle of social mobilizations
surrounding the "indignados" movement or Spanish 15M in 2011. With a primary focus on Spain, we will
concentrate on analyzing cultural artifacts that mark a paradigm shift from a capitalist culture towards the
development of a culture of the commons that seeks to improve the living conditions of the social majority,
defending both human rights and ecological justice. Prerequisite: Spanish 205 or equivalent. 6 credits; HI,
IS; Winter; Palmar Álvarez‐Blanco
SPAN 347 Madrid Program: Welcome to the Spanish Revolution. From the “Spanish Miracle” to the
“Indignant Movement” (1940‐2021) When we travel to another country are we tourists or travelers? What
are our expectations when traveling? How do we get to know a place, its people, and culture? In this course
we will walk through the history of some of the most important cultural and historical landmarks that mark
the different transitions that Spain has gone through. We will become travelers who read, think, observe,
and reflect upon political, cultural, and social questions connected to each text we read and every place we
visit. This program includes several workshops with guest speakers, and significant contact with social
collectives and communities in Spain. Prerequisite: Spanish 205 and participation in OCS Madrid Progrm. 6
credits; SI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
SPAN 349 Madrid Program: Theory and Practice of Urban Life More than a study of the image of Madrid in
Spanish literature, this course examines the actual experience of living in a cosmopolitan city through a
variety of disciplines, including Urban Studies, Geography, Architecture, Sociology, and Spanish poetry and
fiction. Special attention will be given to imaginative walking and counter‐tourist tactics as theorized by Phil
Smith and the British psychogeographic movement. Prerequisite: Spanish 205 or above. 6 credits; LA, IS;
Fall; Humberto R Huergo
SPAN 356 The Political and Cultural History of the Cuban Revolution In 2014 Obama and Castro
simultaneously announced the end of an era: the Cold War. This announcement was a turning point for one
of the most influential and symbolically important political movements in Latin America: The Cuban
Revolution. We will study the political and historical background that sustained this revolution for over fifty

403
years. We will read historical, political, philosophical, and cultural texts to understand this process and the
fascination that it commanded around the world. We will also examine the different exoduses that this
revolution provoked and the exile communities that Cubans constructed in different parts of the world.
Prerequisite: Spanish 205 or above. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
SPAN 358 The Spanish Civil War Considered by many historians the beginning of the II World War, the
Spanish Civil war served as the arena where the main ideologies of the twentieth century‐‐Capitalism,
Fascism, and Communism‐‐first clashed. The result was not only one of the bloodiest wars in history, but
also was of the most idealistic, with 40,000 volunteers from all over the world willing to die in defense of a
country they did not even know. This course will explore the meaning of the war through a variety of
mediums and disciplines, including literature, history, graphic arts, and films. Prerequisite: Spanish 205 or
above. 6 credits; IS, HI; Not offered 2022‐23
SPAN 360 Race and Nation in Caribbean Literature We will study the Caribbean as the space, par
excellence, of imperial, racial and cultural intersections. With a special emphasis on literary production in
the Spanish Caribbean, we will focus on the formation of hegemonic nationalist discourses that often
silenced the region's great racial and cultural diversity. We will analyze symbolic and cultural constructions
of power rationalized with complex racialized beliefs to sustain the social and political structures in these
countries. We will read texts by José Martí, Juan Francisco Manzano, Lydia Cabrera, Nancy Morejón, Nicolás
Guillén, and Derek Walcott among others. Prerequisite: Spanish 205 or above. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered
2022‐23
SPAN 366 Jorge Luis Borges: Less a Man Than a Vast and Complex Literature Borges once said about
Quevedo that he was less a man than a vast and complex literature. This phrase is probably the best
definition for Borges as well. We will discuss the many writers encompassed by Borges: the vanguard
writer, the poet, the detective short story writer, the fantastic story writer, the essayist. We will also study
his many literary masks: H. Bustoc Domecq (the apocryphal writer he created with Bioy Casares) a
pseudonym he used to write chronicles and detective stories. We will study his impact on contemporary
writers and philosophers such as Foucault, Derrida, Roberto Bolaño, etc. Prerequisite: Spanish 205 or
above. 6 credits; LA, IS; Spring; Jorge Brioso
SPAN 370 Indigeneity and Gender in Latin America This course will examine representations of Indigenous
peoples in Latin America during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, with special attention to
constructions of race and gender. We will explore topics such as the racial and gendered associations used
to construct indigeneity, the exclusion of alternative indigenous gender subjectivities, and the double
subordination indigenous women have historically experienced. Some questions we will explore are: How
has indigeneity been understood in nineteenth and twentieth‐century Latin America? How have
nineteenth‐century Latin American nations imagined and disciplined female indigeneity? What new forms
of indigenous gender identities became visible during the twentieth century? The course includes materials
related to Central America (Mexico, Guatemala), the Andes, and the Amazon. Prerequisite: Spanish 205 or
above. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
SPAN 371 Yours Truly: The Body of the Letter This course will focus on letters and their significance as acts
of symbolic and material exchange, as objects that bear the mark of the bodily act of writing, and as a
staging of the scene of writing itself. We will study different types of letters (love letters, prison letters,
literary letters, letters embedded in other texts, fictional letters, epistolary novels, etc.), but always as the
site of production of a modern and gendered self. Texts by Simón Bolívar, Manuela Sáenz, Rosa Luxemburg,
Simone de Beauvoir, André Gorz, Pedro Salinas, Marina Tsvetaeva, Boris Pasternak, Paul Celan, Ingeborg

404
Bachmann, Elena Poniatowska, Alan Pauls and Alfredo Bryce Echenique. Prerequisite: Spanish 205 or
above. 6 credits; LA, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
SPAN 376 Mexico City: The City as Protagonist This seminar will have Mexico City as protagonist, and will
examine the construction of one of the largest urban centers of the world through fictional writing, cultural
criticism, and visual/aural culture. We will critically engage the fictions of its past, the dystopias of its
present, the assemblage of affects and images that give it continuity, but which also codify the ever‐
changing and contested view of its representation and meaning. From Carlos Fuentes to Sayak Valencia, in
the company of Eisenstein and Cuarón, among others. Prerequisite: Spanish 205 or above. 6 credits; LA, IS;
Not offered 2022‐23
SPAN 380 Dispossession, Gentrification, and Reoccupation in Latin America This course studies the concept
of property in Latin America. It analyzes historical events such as colonial dispossession, urban
transformations in cities like Rio de Janeiro, cases of gentrification, reappropriation of territories, and
occupations. The course offers a critical approach to Latin American modernization, both from a historical
and cultural perspective, focusing on discourses of colonialism, hygienization, racial and class
stigmatization, and state violence. Prerequisite: Spanish 205 or above. 6 credits; LA, IS; Winter; Héctor
Melo Ruiz
SPAN 400 Integrative Exercise 6 credits; S/NC; Fall, Winter, Spring

Theater and Dance
The Department of Theater and Dance offers courses spanning the major areas of interest in both
disciplines. Theater offerings include acting, voice, movement, directing, design-technical, and
devised performance as well as courses in literature, history and criticism. In all of our courses our
goal is to examine the intersection of critical thought and creative practice. Theater is an everchanging art, and we strive to expose students to its most recent innovations and the cultural
currents that influence them.
Dance gives students at all levels opportunities for active participation in three basic areas:
movement practice, choreography and analysis, and performance. The broadest goal of these
offerings is to increase understanding of the art of dance as a contribution to a liberal arts education
and to connect theory and practice through embodied learning. Goals that are more specific are the
development of body knowledge; somatic research; cultural awareness of movement and
performing practices; and the experience of Dance Studies as a way to understand current issues and
art from a global and social justice perspective.
While there is a regular major in Theater Arts, advanced students may apply to the chair of Dance
for a special major in Dance.
Requirements for the Dance Minor
The Minor in Dance is for the student who is interested in continuing and deepening their focus on
dance. It can provide an opportunity for cross disciplinary work and connecting dance studies with
another major. Acceptance to the program is based on personal interviews with the program
director.

405

The minor has three components and requires 36 credits for completion:
Movement Practice and Performance: A minimum of 12 credits


It is recommended that at least one movement practice class be taken per term. Additional
movement practice classes offered at Carleton or through OCS may qualify with permission from
the program director.

At least one credit of each of the following:




DANC 205 Winter Dance (1 credit)
DANC 206 Spring Dance (1 credit)
DANC 215 Winter Dance, Student Choreography (1 credit)

With at least nine additional credits from:




















DANC 107 Ballet I (1 credit)
DANC 147 Moving Anatomy (1 credit)
DANC 148 Modern Dance I: Technique and Theory (1 credit)
DANC 150 Contact Improvisation (1 credit)
DANC 158 Contemporary Dance Forms I (1 credit)
DANC 170 Dance Improvisation (1 credit)
DANC 172 Contemporary Experiments (1 credit)
DANC 200 Modern Dance II: Technique and Theory (1 credit)
DANC 205 Winter Dance (1 credit)
DANC 206 Spring Dance (1 credit)
DANC 208 Ballet II (1 credit)
DANC 210 Contemporary Dance Forms II (1 credit)
DANC 215 Winter Dance, Student Choreography (1 credit)
DANC 253 Movement for the Performer (3 credits)
DANC 300 Modern Dance III: Technique and Theory (1 credit)
DANC 301 Contemporary Styles and Techniques: West African Dance Forms (1 credit)
DANC 309 Ballet III (1 credit)
DANC 310 Contemporary Dance Forms III (1 credit)
DANC 350 Semaphore Repertory Dance Company (1 credit, Requires audition)

Choreography: a minimum of 12 credits






DANC 190 Fields of Performance (6 credits)
DANC 268 The Body as Choreographer (6 credits)
DANC 391 Advanced Choreography (Independent Study)
DANC 295 Dance Lab
THEA 260 Space, Time, Body, Minds

History, Theory, and Literature: a minimum of 6 credits




DANC 115 Cultures of Dance (6 credits)
DANC 265 Performing the Orient (6 credits)
DANC 266 Reading the Dancing Body: Topics in Dance History (6 credits)

406

Required Elective: a minimum of 6 additional credits in any of the three categories:




Movement Practice and Performance
Choreography
History, Theory, and Literature

Dance Courses (DANC)
Movement Practice and Performance Courses: 107, 147, 148, 150, 158, 170, 172, 200, 205, 206,
208, 210, 215, 253, 300, 301, 309, 310, 350
All courses may be taken any number of terms at the appropriate level. A maximum of 24 credits
from dance technique classes may be counted toward graduation.
History Courses: Dance: 115, 265 and 266
Choreography Courses: 190, 268, 295
DANC 100 Meaning In Motion: Reading and Writing Dance In this class we will look at dance through
various lenses; queer/feminist, ethnographic, Africanist, disability studies, and activism. We will examine
and broaden the definition of dance and situate it within the discourse of “performance,” recognizing the
larger meaning of “performance” to include all bodily movements, acts and gestures, whether onstage or
off. We will ask questions about the performance of culture, race, gender and ability in various dance
contexts. Researching through the body and movement as well as written and visual texts, students will
develop skills of critical dance viewing, analysis, and writing through formal and informal writing
assignments. We will read, write, view, attend live performance, discuss and move. No previous dance
experience is necessary. 6 credits; AI, WR1, IS; Fall; Judith A Howard
DANC 107 Ballet I A beginning course in ballet technique, including basic positions, beginning patterns and
exercises. Students develop an awareness of the many ways their body can move, an appreciation of dance
as an artistic expression and a recognition of the dancer as an athlete. 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter,
Spring; Jennifer Bader
DANC 115 Cultures of Dance The study of dance is the study of culture. We will look at dance as culturally‐
coded, embodied knowledge and investigate dance forms and contexts across the globe. We will examine,
cross‐culturally, the function of dance in the lives of individuals and societies through various lenses
including feminist, africanist and ethnological perspectives. We will read, write, view videos and
performances, discuss and move. This course in dance theory and practice will include a weekly movement
lab. No previous dance experience necessary. 6 credits; HI, IS; Not offered 2022‐23
DANC 147 Moving Anatomy This course seeks to provide an underlying awareness of body structure and
function. Using movement to expand knowledge of our anatomy will encourage participants to integrate
information with experience. Heightened body awareness and class studies are designed to activate the
general learning process. 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Spring
DANC 148 Modern Dance I: Technique and Theory A physical exploration at the introductory level of the
elements of dance: time, motion, space, shape and energy. Students are challenged physically as they
increase their bodily awareness, balance, control, strength and flexibility and get a glimpse of the art of
dance. 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Winter, Spring; Daphne L McCoy

407
DANC 150 Contact Improvisation This is a course in techniques of spontaneous dancing shared by two or
more people through a common point of physical contact. Basic skills such as support, counterbalance,
rolling, falling and flying will be taught and developed in an environment of mutual creativity. 1 credit;
S/CR/NC; ARP; Winter; Kristin Van Loon, Arwen P Wilder
DANC 158 Contemporary Dance Forms I This course provides an introduction to a variety of movement
approaches that develop an awareness of the body in space and moving through space. Students will learn
approaches designed to strengthen muscles, support joint mobility, find breath support, enhance
coordination, and encourage embodied learning. 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall; Alanna E Morris
DANC 170 Dance Improvisation In this course we will explore spontaneous moving, sourcing inspiration
from our senses, our environment, and each other. Students will work on creating movement,
improvisationally, and sharing that movement with each other. Open to all levels of experience. 1 credit;
ARP; Not offered 2022‐23
DANC 172 Contemporary Experiments This class is a workshop in improvisation using the individual body as
a site/map for exploration. Through an embodied exploration of ancestral memory, tracing and thought to
increase physical range and capacity, we will engage movement within empathetic exchanges as a
collaborative process. Open to all movers. 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall; Leslie L Parker
DANC 190 Fields of Performance This introductory course in choreography explores games, structures,
systems and sports as sources and locations of movement composition and performance. Readings,
viewings and discussion of postmodernist structures and choreographers as well as attendance and analysis
of dance performances and sports events will be jumping off point for creative process and will pave the
way for small individual compositions and one larger project. In an atmosphere of play, spontaneity and
research participants will discover new ways of defining dance, pushing limits and bending the rules. Guest
choreographers and coaches will be invited as part of the class. Open to all movers. No previous experience
necessary. 6 credits; ARP; Spring; Judith A Howard
DANC 200 Modern Dance II: Technique and Theory A continuation of Level I with more emphasis on the
development of technique and expressive qualities. 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Spring; Daphne L McCoy
DANC 205 Winter Dance Intensive rehearsal and performance of a work commissioned from professional
guest choreographer. Learning and training the basics of Krump. The process of the growth development in
this intensive will be approached with LUAEE (Learn, Understand, Apply, Investigate and Execute). The end
result will be for each individual to know more about the style’s foundation and become able to improvise
within the style. The class will culminate in a performance in the Spring Term, so students taking this course
should plan to register for DANC 206 in Spring. Open to all levels. 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Winter
DANC 206 Spring Dance Rehearsal and full concert performance of student dance works created during the
year and completed in the spring term. Open to all levels. Prerequisite: Dance 205 or 215. 1 credit;
S/CR/NC; ARP; Spring; Judith A Howard, Daphne L McCoy
DANC 208 Ballet II For the student with previous ballet experience. This course emphasizes articulation of
technique and development of ballet vocabulary. 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Jennifer
Bader
DANC 210 Contemporary Dance Forms II This course is intended for students seeking to refine and deepen
their awareness of embodied movement approaches. Through these approaches, students will work to

408
develop an alert and articulate body. In both standing and floor work, momentum, dynamic shifts and
spatial challenges are introduced. 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Winter; Rae Charles Harge
DANC 215 Winter Dance, Student Choreography For students enrolled in Dance 205, supervised student
choreography with two public showings. Prerequisite: Dance 205. 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Winter
DANC 253 Movement for the Performer This course investigates the structure and function of the body
through movement. Applying a variety of somatic techniques (feldenkrais, yoga, improvisation, body‐mind
centering). The emphasis will be to discover effortless movement, balance in the body and an integration of
self in moving. 3 credits; ARP; Winter; Rae Charles Harge
DANC 265 Performing the Orient Magic carpets, glittering pagodas, harem fantasies...Orientalism
dominated Europe's creative landscape and imagination since the 1700s, but what purpose did it serve?
This class will explore over 300 years of "exotic" portrayals of "Orientals" on the Western ballet and opera
stages, and geopolitics that impacted how we view Asian people and cultures to this day: from Genghis
Khan, the Opium Wars, Chinese Exclusion, to Japanese Internment and #StopAsianHate. The course will
also examine the creative process of shifting a Eurocentric work of art for a multiracial audience and
provide practical frameworks for how to create art outside of your own cultural experience. 6 credits; HI, IS;
Fall; Phil S Chan
DANC 266 Reading The Dancing Body Dance is a field in which bodies articulate a history of sexuality,
nation, gender, and race. In this course, the investigation of the body as a “text” will be anchored by
intersectional and feminist perspectives. We will re‐center American concert dance history, emphasizing
the Africanist base of American Dance performance, contemporary black choreographers, and Native
American concert dance. Through reading, writing, discussing, moving, viewing videos and performances
the class will “read” the gender, race, and politics of the dancing body in the cultural/historical context of
Modern, Post Modern and Contemporary Dance. 6 credits; HI, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
DANC 268 The Body as Choreographer "The pleasure of the text is that moment when my body pursues its
own ideas‐for my body does not have the same ideas I do." ‐Roland Barthes. Through guided movement
sessions we will explore the body as a source for ideas. Using "Authentic Movement," experiential anatomy
practices and compositional strategies, students will generate several small compositions and one larger
gallery project exploring alternative spaces and the influx of various media (movement, text, images,
technology, objects, sites, fabric). This choreography "lab" will help answer the question: How do you make
a dance? For both beginning and advanced dance students. 6 credits; ARP; Not offered 2022‐23
DANC 295 Dance Lab DANCE LAB will provide an adventurous and practical space where students of various
levels can explore body‐based performance with an emphasis on the solo form. Students will examine the
choreographic elements of space, time, energy, action, framing, and environment as they discover personal
aesthetics and investigate how to organize physical ideas in both immediate and virtual spaces. A
community of deep listening will support creative acts that can effect change ‐ socio‐political‐personal.
Performance solos will be developed through discussion, peer feedback, and regular meetings with the
faculty mentor. Work for the class will include your own rehearsals and, outside readings and viewings. The
ability to record your work is required and access to a camera is recommended (phones are fine). 6
credits; ARP; Not offered 2022‐23
DANC 300 Modern Dance III: Technique and Theory Intensive work on technical, theoretical, and expressive
problems for the experienced dancer. 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter; Daphne L McCoy

409
DANC 301 West African Dance In this class you will be introduced to traditional West African dance
movement accompanied by live drumming. A variety of dynamics such as grounding, centeredness, and
footwork will be addressed. Each class will cover the cultural background of the rhythm as well as the
conversation between drummer and dancer. All levels are welcome to join in this vigorous experience of
West African dance forms. 2 credits; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall; Whitney McClusky
DANC 309 Ballet III This is an advanced class for students who have some capabilities and proficiency in
ballet technique. Content is sophisticated and demanding in its use of ballet vocabulary and musical
phrasing. 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Spring; Jennifer Bader
DANC 310 Contemporary Dance Forms III This advanced course will continue to focus on a variety of
embodied movement approaches to refine the awareness of the moving body and prepare for the rigors of
performance and physical research. The aim will be on finding a personal connection to movement through
subtlety, speed and effort. 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Spring
DANC 350 Semaphore Repertory Dance Company Provides advanced dance students with an intensive
opportunity to develop as performers in professional level dances. Skills to be honed are: the dancer as
contributor to the process of art‐making; defining individual technical and expressive gifts; working in a
variety of new technical and philosophical dance frameworks. In addition to regular training during the
academic terms, participation in a "preseason" rehearsal period before fall term is required. A few pieces of
student choreography will be accepted for repertory. The group produces an annual concert, performs in
the Twin Cities and makes dance exchanges with other college groups. Prerequisite: Audition required. 1
credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Judith A Howard, Daphne L McCoy

Requirements for the Theater Major
Requirements for the major:
Note: any single course may satisfy only one requirement.
69 credits distributed as follows:
1. 12 credits in theater history and theory:



THEA 225 Theater History and Theory
THEA 242 Modern American Drama (not offered in 2022‐23)

2. 6 credits from the following courses in design or technical theater:







THEA 115 Principles of Design
THEA 229 Makeup Design
THEA 234 Lighting Design for the Performing Arts
THEA 237 Scenic Design for the Performing Arts (not offered in 2022‐23)
THEA 238 Costume Design for Theater (not offered in 2022‐23)
THEA 239 Costume Pattern Development (not offered in 2022‐23)

410




THEA 256 Costume Construction (not offered in 2022‐23)
THEA 257 Costume Pattern Development (not offered in 2022‐23)
THEA 320 Live Performance and Digital Media (not offered in 2022‐23)

3. 18 credits from the following courses in practical theater:















DANC 150 Contact Improvisation
DANC 253 Movement for the Performer
DANC 268 The Body as Choreographer (not offered in 2022‐23)
THEA 110 Beginning Acting
THEA 185 The Speaking Voice
THEA 195 Acting Shakespeare (not offered in 2022‐23)
THEA 199 Theater Practicum
THEA 226 Avant‐garde Theater and Performance (not offered in 2022‐23)
THEA 227 Theatre for Social Change
THEA 245 Directing
THEA 246 Playwriting (not offered in 2022‐23)
THEA 260 Space, Time, Body, Minds (not offered in 2022‐23)
THEA 312 Topics in Theater (not offered in 2022‐23)
THEA 345 Devised Theater and Collective Creation (not offered in 2022‐23)

4. 18 credits at the 300 level, at least six of which should be English 310 (additional courses may be
added to this group as approved):







ENGL 310 Shakespeare II (not offered in 2022‐23)
RUSS 351 Chekhov (not offered in 2022‐23)
THEA 312 Topics in Theater (not offered in 2022‐23)
THEA 314 Advanced Acting (not offered in 2022‐23)
THEA 320 Live Performance and Digital Media (not offered in 2022‐23)
THEA 345 Devised Theater and Collective Creation (not offered in 2022‐23)

5. 6 additional credits, in literature, criticism, or history courses from the following list:

















CLAS 116 Ancient Drama: Truth in Performance (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 116 The Art of Drama: Passion, Politics, and Culture (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 144 Shakespeare I
ENGL 213 Christopher Marlowe (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 214 Revenge Tragedy
ENGL 219 Global Shakespeare
ENGL 244 Shakespeare I
ENGL 258 Playwrights of Color: Taking the Stage
ENGL 278 London Program: Shakespeare's England (not offered in 2022‐23)
ENGL 281 London Program: London as City: Londinium to the Anthropocene
ENGL 282 London Program: London Theater
ENGL 381 London as a City: Londinium to the Anthropocene
THEA 226 Avant‐garde Theater and Performance (not offered in 2022‐23)
THEA 248 We Can't Go On, We'll Go On: Existential Themes in Drama, Ancient to Modern (not
offered in 2022‐23)
THEA 251 Top Girls: Women Playwrights (not offered in 2022‐23)
THEA 255 August Wilson: History and the Blues

411

6. 2 credits of THEA 190, Players Production
7. 6 credits of 400, Integrative Exercise
Requirements for the Theater Minor
The Theater minor requires 38 credits. It is designed for students who are interested in extending
and deepening their exploration of Theater Arts. Theater is inherently cross disciplinary. Its subdisciplines include acting, directing, design, playwriting, and literary analysis. The Minor has four
tracks and two required courses. Students may choose one track or a combination of tracks to arrive
at the minimum of 38 credits.
1. Two required courses:



THEA 225 Theater History and Theory
THEA 242 Modern American Drama (not offered in 2022‐23)

2. One of the following tracks. Courses marked with an * are required.


Acting

o
o
o

*THEA 110 Beginning Acting
*THEA 195 Acting Shakespeare (taken at the 200 or 300 level);
6 credits from one of the following courses or approved by the minor coordinator or
department chair.
o








Directing:

o
o
o



THEA 185 The Speaking Voice
THEA 312 Topics in Theater: Acting (not offered 2022‐23)
THEA 314 Advanced Acting
THEA 345 Devised Theater and Collective Creation (not offered 2022‐23)
CLAS 116 Ancient Drama: Truth in Performance (not offered 2022‐23)

*THEA 115 Principles of Design
*THEA 245 Directing
*THEA 345 Devised Theater and Collective Creation (not offered 2022‐23)

Design

o
o

*THEA 115 Principles of Design
12 credits from the following courses or approved by the minor coordinator or department
chair
o






THEA 229 Makeup Design
THEA 234 Lighting Design for the Performing Arts
THEA 237 Scenic Design for the Performing Arts (not offered 2022‐23)
THEA 238 Costume Design for the Theater (not offered 2022‐23)
THEA 239 Topics in Theater: Costume Design (not offered 2022‐23)

412





THEA 256 Costume Construction (not offered 2022‐23)
THEA 257 Costume Pattern Development (not offered 2022‐23)
THEA 320 Live Performance and Digital Media (not offered 2022‐23)

Playwriting and Research

o
o
o

* THEA 226 Avant‐Garde Theater and Performance (not offered 2022‐23)
* THEA 246 Playwriting (not offered 2022‐23)
6 credits from the following courses or approved by the minor coordinator or department
chair.
o










THEA 251 Top Girls: Women Playwrights (not offered 2022‐23)
THEA 255 August Wilson: History and Blues
ENGL 129 Introduction to British Comedy (not offered 2022‐23)
ENGL 144 Shakespeare
ENGL 213 Christopher Marlowe (not offered 2022‐23)
ENGL 214 Revenge Tragedy (not offered 2022‐23)
ENGL 258 Contemporary American Playwrights of Color
ENGL 282 London Program: London Theater
RUSS 351 Chekhov (not offered 2022‐23)

3. Six course credits outside the chosen sub-disciplinary track approved by the minor coordinator
or department chair.
4. Two credits of THEA 190 Carleton Players Production
or
Three credits of THEA 199 Theater Practicum.
A student participating in a department production is automatically enrolled in THEA 190, which is
allotted one academic credit. Students with significant roles in a production can earn three credits in
THEA 199 with permission and must waitlist for the class.
Theater Courses
THEA 100 The Power of Story From ancient myths to Pixar films, from conversations with doctors to
Superbowl commercials, we understand and shape our world through story. This course teaches students
the principles of dramatic storytelling through theatrical improvisation and critical analysis of plays and
films that deal with the themes of power and resistance. The course is both analytical and creative. You will
learn how artists structure dramatic stories to impact society while writing and performing your own stories
for the class. 6 credits; AI, WR1; Fall; Andrew I Carlson
THEA 110 Beginning Acting Introduces students to fundamental acting skills, including preliminary physical
training, improvisational techniques, and basic scene work. The course includes analysis of plays as bases
for performance, with a strong emphasis on characterization. 6 credits; ARP; Fall, Winter; David E Wiles,
Andrew I Carlson
THEA 115 Principles of Design Explores the process of communicating ideas and experience through visual
means. Whether that process begins with a written text, choreographed movement or abstract idea, such

413
elements as color, shape, space, value and balance inevitably come into play in its visual representation.
This course teaches these fundamental principles and how to apply them in practice. Principles of Design is
an essential course for students interested in any aspect of theater, dance, or performance. 6 credits; ARP;
Fall; Mary Ann A Kelling
THEA 185 The Speaking Voice This course seeks to provide a practical understanding of the human voice, its
anatomy, functioning and the underlying support mechanisms of body and breath. Using techniques rooted
in the work of Berry, Linklater and Rodenburg, the course will explore the development of physical balance
and ease and the awareness of the connection between thinking and breathing that will lead to the
effortless, powerful and healthy use of the voice in public presentations and in dramatic performance. 6
credits; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; David E Wiles
THEA 190 Carleton Players Production Each term students may participate in one Players production, a
hands‐on, faculty‐supervised process of conceptualization, construction, rehearsal, and performance.
Credit is awarded for a predetermined minimum of time on the production, to be arranged with faculty.
Productions explore our theatre heritage from Greek drama to new works. Students may participate
through audition or through volunteering for production work. 1 credit; S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring;
Andrew I Carlson
THEA 195 Acting Shakespeare Though widely read, Shakespeare's plays were written to be performed. This
acting class, designed for students with no prior experience with Shakespeare, will explore approaches to
performance with an emphasis on the use of the First Folio. Students will create performances using
Shakespeare's approaches to rhetoric, imagery and structure while examining some of the plays' principle
themes. Video and audio recordings will be used to develop a critical perspective on acting Shakespeare
with an emphasis on the differing demands of live and recorded performance. 6 credits; ARP; Not offered
2022‐23
THEA 199 Theater Practicum This course is designed for students who have major responsibilities in
Carleton Players productions as Stage Managers, Actors and Designers. Students enrolled in this class will
have more responsibility and be expected to commit to more time than the students registered in Theater
190, including additional time for research, design and role preparation. Students in this course will get in‐
depth learning experiences in the processes most central to the discipline; the creation of performances.
Students will waitlist for the course; enrollment in the course will be by instructor's permission depending
on the responsibilities students have. Prerequisite: Waitlist only, instructors permission required. 3 credits;
S/CR/NC; ARP; Fall, Winter, Spring; Andrew I Carlson
THEA 225 Theater History and Theory Throughout history, theatrical performance has been both a
reflection of cultural values and a platform for envisioning social change. In this course, students will
examine many of the traditions that inform contemporary understandings of theatre, including Greek
tragedy, commedia dell’arte, Japanese Noh, Sanskrit drama, Realism, Brechtian theatre, and the Theatre of
the Oppressed. Students will also study the history of theatre in the United States by examining blackface
minstrel performance, African American drama, and the role of theatre in the social movements of the
twentieth century. Class sessions will combine lecture, discussion, embodied exercises, and performance of
historical texts. 6 credits; LA, WR2; Fall; Andrew I Carlson
THEA 226 Avant‐garde Theater and Performance "Make it new!" was the rallying cry of the modernists, and
ever since, the theater has never ceased its efforts to break both aesthetic and social conventions,
boundaries, and taboos. Beginning with some of the important precursors of the twentieth century‐‐
Artaud, Brecht, and Meyerhold‐‐this course will explore the history and theory of the contemporary avant‐

414
garde, charting the rise of interdisciplinary "performance" and exploring such topics as politics and
aesthetics, site‐specificity, body art, solo performance, and multimedia. Students will also spend significant
time creating their own performance works. 6 credits; LA; Not offered 2022‐23
THEA 227 Theatre for Social Change This class is an examination of significant artists who use theatre as a
tool for envisioning and enacting social change. We will study the justice‐making strategies of a variety of
artists, including Augusto Boal, Cherríe Moraga, Anna Deavere Smith, among many other contemporary
artists whose work continues to shape American society. We will also examine influential methods of using
theatre for social change, including documentary theatre, Theatre of the Oppressed, theatre for young
audiences, and theatre in prisons. The class will include a number of guest artist visits from people making
work in the field. The final project will be an original theatrical creation that uses the strategies studied in
class to address a contemporary social issue. 6 credits; ARP; Spring; Andrew I Carlson
THEA 229 Makeup Design Theory and practice of two and three dimensional makeup design for the
performer. This course explores corrective, character and specialized makeup techniques as well as
rendering techniques. 3 credits; ARP; Spring; Mary Ann A Kelling
THEA 234 Lighting Design for the Performing Arts An introduction to and practice in stage lighting for the
performing arts. Coursework will cover the function of light in design; lighting equipment and technology;
communication graphics through practical laboratory explorations. Application of principles for
performance events and contemporary lighting problems will be studied through hands‐on application. 6
credits; ARP; Winter; Tony J Stoeri
THEA 237 Scenic Design for the Performing Arts This course will focus on the art and practice of creating
scenic designs for the performing arts. It will introduce basic design techniques while exploring the
collaborative process involved in bringing scenery from concept to the stage. The course will include
individual and group projects utilizing collage, sketching, and model‐making. 6 credits; ARP; Not offered
2022‐23
THEA 238 Costume Design for Theater An introductory course in costume design. This course will examine
the basic concepts of design and how they apply to costumes. In depth analysis of the script and characters
will lead to an exploration of how costume design can be used to enhance the production. Basic rendering
techniques and clothing history will also be studied. 3 credits; ARP; Not offered 2022‐23
THEA 239 Costume Pattern Development Costume Pattern Development is an in‐depth exploration of flat
patterning techniques. These techniques will be used to translate a costume or clothing design to a pattern
that can be used to create the designed garment. Each student will pattern and create a garment of their
own design. Knowledge of sewing is beneficial but not required. 3 credits; ARP; Not offered 2022‐23
THEA 242 Modern American Drama A study of significant American plays from the early twentieth century
to the present, including playwrights such as Tennessee Williams, August Wilson, Alice Childress, Suzan
Lori‐Parks, and Lauren Yee. We will read plays from a theatrical lens, discussing them as blueprints
for performance by examining their structure, characters, language, and theatricality. We will also discuss
how these plays are in conversation with contextual historical events and notions of American identity. 6
credits; LA, WR2, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
THEA 245 Directing Although many directors begin their artistic careers in some other discipline (usually
acting), there is a set of skills particular to the director's art that is essential to creating life on stage. Central
is the ability to translate dramatic action and narrative into the dimensions of theatrical time and space: the
always‐present challenge of "page to stage." In this course, students will learn methods of text analysis

415
strategic to this process as well as the rudiments of using that analysis to generate effective staging and
powerful acting. Having mastered the fundamentals, students will then explore and enhance their
theatrical imagination, that creative mode unique to the medium of live performance. Class time will be
devoted to work on three major projects and almost daily exercises. 6 credits; ARP; Spring; David E Wiles
THEA 246 Playwriting A laboratory to explore the craft of playwriting, concentrating on structure, action
and character. The class uses games, exercises, scenes, with the goal of producing a short play by the end of
the term. 6 credits; ARP; Not offered 2022‐23
THEA 248 We Can't Go On, We'll Go On: Existential Themes in Drama, Ancient to Modern Many twentieth
century playwrights focused their plays on the existentialist belief that we are absurd beings in a universe
empty of meaning. Those writers responded in part to questions raised by the World Wars, the Great
Depression, genocides and the Cold War. But those ideas are examined from antiquity onward and from
many cultures in response to catastrophic events from earlier times to the threats posed by pandemics, war
and environmental challenges in the current century. This course compares existential plays across time
and cultures. It includes works by Beckett, Mishima, Sophocles, Soyinka, Wallace, Williams, Xingjian, and
others. 6 credits; LA, WR2; Not offered 2022‐23
THEA 251 Top Girls: Women Playwrights A study of women playwrights, performance‐makers, and
performers and the representations of women they create on stage. Playwrights addressed will range from
historical figures like Lillian Hellman to their more recent descendants, such as Caryl Churchill, Suzan Lori‐
Parks, and Young Jean Lee. More broadly, the course will look at women who have figured prominently as
directors or creators of non‐traditional performance, such as Hallie Flanagan, founder of the Federal
Theater Project, or more recently, Elizabeth LeCompte, artistic director of the experimental Wooster
Group. 6 credits; LA; Not offered 2022‐23
THEA 255 August Wilson: History and the Blues This course will explore the ten plays that comprise August
Wilson's "Century Cycle." Wilson wrote one play for each decade of the twentieth century, exploring the
movement of African‐Americans, in critic John Lahr's words, "from property to personhood." Wilson's work,
inspired by the Black Arts movement of the 1960's‐70's is rooted musically in the Blues, the African
American musical form at the root of modern American popular music. We will read these plays, informed
by the Blues, against the major historical events in African‐American life during each of the decades they
represent. 6 credits; LA, IDS; Winter; David E Wiles
THEA 256 Costume Construction The first four weeks of this course will use a Zen‐like approach to sewing.
We will focus on hand sewing techniques, including the Japanese technique of Sahsiko, that can be used to
repair, reuse and reinvent clothing. Section one will focus on basic stitches and closures, while section two
will practice couture hand sewing techniques and practices. The last half of the term we will work on
sewing machines.Section one will learn how to use the machine, covering basic stitches and
techniques.Section two will expand on the their sewing machine skills and explore a variety of advanced
techniques. 3 credits; ARP; Not offered 2022‐23
THEA 257 Costume Pattern Development Costume Pattern Development is an in-depth exploration of
flat patterning techniques. These techniques will be used to translate a costume or clothing design
to a pattern that can be used to create the designed garment. Each student will pattern and create
a garment of their own design. Knowledge of sewing is beneficial but not required.
3 credits; ARP; Not offered 2022‐23
THEA 260 Space, Time, Body, Minds What is a body? What can bodies do? These questions guide our
journey into the elements of space/time/body/mind as anchor points to explore contemporary

416
performance art. We will engage feminist technoscience studies, geographies of space and place, trauma‐
informed care practices, intersectional women of color feminisms, and art as activism to deepen our
evolving understandings of spacetimebodyminds. Students will develop performance solos in their chosen
artistic mediums that take up and respond to bodies as theoretical, material, concrete, and abstract. The
course is open to all students, regardless of experience level, with an interest in: movement, performance,
art, community building, feminist theory, and collective creation. Assignments will include a mix of
viewings, creative response sheets, journal prompts, embodied exercises, and a research‐based photo
essay. 6 credits; ARP; Not offered 2022‐23
THEA 270 Art and (Un)Freedom Underpinned by women of color feminisms, abolitionism, and socially
engaged performance practices, this course unpacks how art is a vehicle for social change in spaces of
unfreedom such as: jails, prisons, ICE facilities, detention centers, and group home facilities. Work for the
class will include readings and creative reading responses, researching case studies, and reflective
assignments. As a culminating project, students will create individual performance‐based works informed
by critical understandings of punishment, crime, enslavement, surveillance, and/or state violence. 6
credits; HI, IDS; Not offered 2022‐23
THEA 312 Topics in Theater Topics in Theater Acting will encompass a series of specialized courses in acting
at the advanced level. Topics offered may include non‐Western performance forms, Restoration comedy,
Theater of the Absurd, Chekhov, and other period‐ or genre‐based modes. Prerequisite: Theater 110. 6
credits; ARP; Not offered 2022‐23
THEA 314 Advanced Acting Advanced Acting focuses on in‐depth scene study, auditioning, and acting for
the camera. While Beginning Acting THEA 110 is recommended, students with other previous acting
experience may also register. 6 credits; ARP; Not offered 2022‐23
THEA 320 Live Performance and Digital Media We live in a world where the presence of digital technology is
ubiquitous. Our reality is augmented by portals that open up universes of undiscovered possibilities for
expanding, creating, archiving and documenting art. Yet these media have a physical presence that
demands the artist find new ways of negotiating space and time on a stage. This class explores the ways in
which digital media shape the everyday and ways in which they relate to performing and performance art
in a historical, cultural and technological sense. Students will experiment with processes for incorporating
digital technologies into their performances, while engaging in conversations around embodiment, identity
and space. Prerequisite: Any course in Theater Arts, Dance, Cinema and Media Studies, Studio Art, creative
writing or musical composition. 6 credits; ARP; Not offered 2022‐23
THEA 345 Devised Theater and Collective Creation A usual evening in the theater consists of seeing a text‐‐
the play‐‐staged by a director and performed by actors. While this is certainly a collaborative endeavor,
recent decades have seen a marked increase in "devised theater," a mode intended to upset the traditional
hierarchies of theatrical production. In practical terms, this means the abandonment of the extant text in
favor of a performance "score"‐‐sometimes textual, often physical‐‐developed improvisationally in
rehearsal by the performers. This course will explore the methods and approaches used to work in this
collective and highly creative manner, and will culminate in a public performance. We will also discuss the
history and cultural politics that inform devised practice. Prerequisite: Theater 110 or Dance 150 or 190 or
instructor permission. 6 credits; ARP; Not offered 2022‐23
THEA 400 Integrative Exercise 1‐6 credit; S/NC; Winter, Spring; Andrew I Carlson

Pre-Matriculation Work

417

Carleton accepts up to 36 credits toward the Carleton degree from the following:





College Board Advanced Placement,
Higher Level International Baccalaureate,
select British A‐level Examinations with grades of B or higher
Approved pre‐matriculation credits (credits earned in college‐level courses taken before graduation
from high school or before matriculation at a college or university).

These credits may not be applied to distribution requirements. Additional information on
transferring college-level work can be found in our Transfer of Credits Policy.
Beginning with the incoming class of 2026
Carleton accepts any combination of up to 18 pre- or post-matriculation credits toward the Carleton
degree from the following:





College Board Advanced Placement,
Higher Level International Baccalaureate,
select British A‐level Examinations (GCE) with grades of B or higher,
credits earned in college‐level courses taken at a regionally accredited college or university,
including courses taken as PSEO or College in the Schools.

Pre-matriculation credits may not be applied to distribution requirements. Additional information on
transferring college-level work can be found in our Transfer of Credits Policy.
Placement Testing Scores
Several departments on campus offer tests to determine student placement into appropriate level
Carleton courses. Some placement examinations are administered via the Web during the summer
prior to matriculation; others are offered during New Student Week.
Carleton language and math placement test scores indicate the course the student should register for
(e.g., a 204 in Spanish means you should register for Spanish 204). A score of 205 in French,
German, Latin, Russian or Spanish (or 206 in Arabic, Chinese or Japanese) means that the language
requirement has been satisfied. SAT II scores of 690 and above for French or 650 or above for
Spanish or 680 and above for German successfully fulfill the Language Requirement.
In the disciplines of foreign language and mathematics, Carleton requires placement exam results to
determine transferability of credits earned at a prior college.
College Entrance Examination Board (CEEB) Advanced Placement
The following policies regarding CEEB Advanced Placement examination scores apply for the
2022-23 academic year:
ART AND ART HISTORY—Art History: Score of 5: 6 credits granted. Credits do not apply to
the major. Studio Art (2D, 3D or Drawing): Score of 4 or 5: 6 credits granted (maximum twelve
credits from Studio Art AP) Placement awarded beyond ARTS 110, but only after departmental
review of the portfolio. Credits do not apply to the major.

418

BIOLOGY—Score of 5: 6 credits granted that count toward the biology major and placement is
awarded into Biology 126; Biology 125 is not required for upper-level courses in biology. Score of
3 or 4: 6 credits granted, both introductory courses are required for upper-level courses in biology.
CHEMISTRY—Score of 3: Placement is awarded into Chemistry 123 or 128. Score of 4 or 5: 6
credits granted that count toward a chemistry major and placement is awarded into Chemistry 224
Principles of Chemistry II or CHEM 233 Organic Chemistry I. Students receiving this AP credit
cannot also get credit for Chemistry 123 or 128. The Chemistry Department strongly encourages
students receiving AP credit to wait until their sophomore year to take Chemistry 233 (Organic
Chemistry I).
CLASSICAL LANGUAGES—Greek: There is no Greek Advanced Placement Test,
however, placement and fulfillment of the Language Requirement may be awarded to new students
with the appropriate knowledge of ancient Greek. Take the Greek placement exam during New
Student Week. Latin Literature, Virgil: Score of 1-4: No credit granted. Placement determined
after taking the on-line Latin exam. Score of 5: 6 credits granted and the Language Requirement
fulfilled either by passing the departmental on-line Latin Placement Test or by placing into and
successfully completing Latin 204 with a grade of C- or above.
COMPUTER SCIENCE—Computer Science A: Score of 4 or 5: exemption granted for
Computer Science 111; 6 credits granted which count toward a computer science major (for
Computer Science 111). Computer Science Principles: Score of 5: 6 credits granted
ECONOMICS—Only Economics Micro: Score of 5: 6 credits and exemption granted from
Principles of Economics 111 course. Only Economics Macro: Score of 5: 6 credits and exemption
granted from Principles of Economics 110 course. Both Economics Micro and Macro: Score of 5:
6 credits and exemption granted from Principles of Economics 110 and 111 courses.
ENGLISH—Language/Composition: Score of 4 or 5: 6 credits granted.
Literature/Composition: Score of 4 or 5: 6 credits granted. Score of 5 in Literature/Composition: 6
credits granted for English major and exemption from "Foundations" requirement.
ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE—Score of 4 or 5: 6 credits granted.
FRENCH—Language: Score of 1, 2, 3: No credit or placement awarded. If the Language
Requirement is to be fulfilled with the French language or placement in the French course sequence
is desired, take the French Placement Test. Score of 4 or 5: 6 credits granted; placement awarded
into any course above Level 204; Language Requirement fulfilled.
GEOGRAPHY—No course credit offered.
GERMAN—Language: Score of 1, 2, 3: No credit or placement awarded. If the Language
Requirement is to be fulfilled with the German language, or placement with the German course
sequence is desired, take the German Placement Test. Score of 4 or 5: 6 credits granted; placement
awarded into any course for which the level 204 language class is a prerequisite; Language
Requirement fulfilled.
HISTORY—The History department grants credit toward the major and towards Early
Modern/Modern European and U.S. fields within the major for scores of 4 or 5 on the Advanced

419

Placement examinations in United States and European history. The department does not give major
credit for the AP World History examination at this time, although a 4 or 5 on the AP World
History Examination may be used to fulfill the 210 credits needed for graduation. Note: the History
department will count no more than 12 pre-matriculation credits total toward the major from
approved exams (AP and/or IB), and majors are strongly encouraged to count no more than 6 such
credits toward the major.
MATHEMATICS and STATISTICS—Calculus AB: Score of 4 or 5: 6 credits granted which
count toward the Math major (for Mathematics 111) after successful completion of Mathematics
120 with a grade of C- or better. Calculus BC: Score of 4 or 5: 12 credits granted which count
toward the Mathematics major (for Mathematics 111 and 120) after successful completion of
Mathematics 211 with grade of C- or better. Statistics: Score of 4 or 5: placement into Statistics
230 (formerly Mathematics 245); 6 credits granted after successful completion of Statistics 230
(formerly Mathematics 245) with a grade of C- or better.
MUSIC—Theory: Score of 4 or 5: 6 credits granted. This does not grant students automatic
exemption from Music 103 (Musicianship Lab I) and/or Music 110 (Theory I); exemption in these
courses is determined by departmental placement exam. Credits earned via the AP exam do not
count for elective credit in the major or minor.
PHYSICS 1: Score of 3, 4, or 5: 3 credits granted. Physics 1 and 2: Score of 3, 4, or 5 on both
exams: 6 credits granted. Score of 3 suggested placement into Physics 131 (five weeks course) or
Physics 143 or Physics 145 (ten week courses). Score of 4 or 5 suggested placement into Physics
144 (10 week course) with appropriate math preparation. Physics C Mechanics OR Physics C
Electricity & Magnetism: Score of 3, 4, or 5: 3 credits granted. Physics C Mechanics AND
Physics C Electricity & Magnetism: Score of 3, 4 or 5 on both exams: 6 credits granted. Score of
4 or 5 suggested placement into Physics 144 (10 week course). Placement into higher courses
possible, but will be determined individually upon consultation with the department. No more than
6 total credits can be granted for AP Physics exams.
POLITICAL SCIENCE—American Government Score of 5: 6 credits granted. Comparative
Government Score of 5: 6 credits granted.
PSYCHOLOGY—Score of 4 or 5: 6 credits and exemption from Psychology 110 granted after
successful completion (C- or better) of any 200 or 300 level Psychology course.
SPANISH—Language: Score of 4 or 5: 6 credits granted; placement awarded into any course
above Level 204; Language Requirement fulfilled. Literature: Score of 4 or 5: 6 credits granted
and placement awarded into any course above Level 204; Language Requirement fulfilled.
International Baccalaureate
Carleton’s policy for the 2022-23 academic year on awarding credit for International Baccalaureate
Higher level examinations is as follows:
ART—Studio Art (Drawing and General): Score of 6 or 7: 6 credits granted. Placement awarded
beyond ARTS 110, but only after departmental review of the portfolio. Credits do not apply to the
major.

420

BIOLOGY— Score of 6 or 7: 6 credits granted that count toward the biology major and placement
is awarded into Biology 126, Biology 125 is not required for upper-level courses in biology. Score
of 4 or 5: 6 credits granted, both introductory courses are required for upper-level courses in
biology.
CHEMISTRY—Score of 4: Placement is awarded into Chemistry 123 or 128. Score of 5, 6, or 7: 6
credits are granted that count toward the chemistry major and placement is awarded into Chemistry
224 Principles of Chemistry II or CHEM 233 Organic Chemistry I. Students receiving this IB credit
cannot also get credit for Chemistry 123 or 128. The Chemistry Department strongly encourages
students receiving IB credit to wait until their sophomore year to take Chemistry 233 (Organic
Chemistry I).
CHINESE—Score of 5, 6 or 7: 6 credits granted if student successfully fulfills the language
requirement through the Carleton Chinese placement exam.
ECONOMICS—Score of 6 or 7: 6 credits and exemption granted from Economics 110 and 111.
ENGLISH—Score of 5, 6, or 7: 6 credits granted. Score of 6 or 7: 6 credits granted for English
major and exemption from "Foundations" requirement.
FRENCH—Score of 6 or 7: 6 credits granted; placement awarded into any course for which the
level 204 language class is a prerequisite; Language Requirement fulfilled.
GERMAN— Score of 6 or 7: 6 credits granted; placement awarded into any course for which the
level 204 language class is a prerequisite; Language Requirement fulfilled.
HISTORY—Score of 5, 6 or 7 in any test, 6 credits granted, which may be applied toward a major
field and/or total major credits with approval by the History Department Chair. Note: the History
department will count no more than 12 pre-matriculation credits total toward the major from
approved exams (AP and/or IB), and majors are strongly encouraged to count no more than 6 such
credits toward the major.
JAPANESE—Score of 5, 6, or 7: 6 credits granted if student successfully fulfills the language
requirement through the Carleton Japanese placement exam.
LATIN—No course credit offered. Placement subject to Carleton Placement Exam.
MATHEMATICS and STATISTICS—Analysis and Approaches Higher Level: Score of 5, 6, or
7: credits are granted when a student successfully completes the course into which placement was
awarded with a grade of C- or better. See the Mathematics Placement Coordinator for placement.
MUSIC—Score of 5, 6, or 7: 6 credits granted. This does not grant students automatic exemption
from Music 103 (Musicianship Lab I) and/or Music 110 (Theory I); exemption in these courses is
determined by departmental placement exam. Credits earned via the IB exam do not count for
elective credit in the major or minor.
PHILOSOPHY—Score of 5, 6, or 7: 6 credits granted.

421

PHYSICS—Score of 5, 6, or 7: 6 credits granted. Placement into courses will be determined
individually upon consultation with the Department.
PSYCHOLOGY—Score of 6 or 7: 6 credits and exemption from Psychology 110 granted after
successful completion (C- or better) of any 200 or 300 level Psychology course.
RUSSIAN—Score of 5, 6, or 7: 6 credits granted if student successfully fulfills the language
requirement through the Russian placement exam.
SPANISH-Score of 6 or 7: 6 credits granted; placement awarded into any course for which the
level 204 language class is a prerequisite; language requirement fulfilled.
A-Level Examinations
Carleton will grant credit for selected high-level (HL) A-Level (Cambridge) Examinations with
grades of B or higher. A laminated score card must be presented to the Registrar's Office for credit
to be awarded; the Office will make a copy of your card and return the card to you.

Off-Campus Study Programs
Approximately 70% of Carleton students participate in at least one off-campus study program
during their years at Carleton. To meet the needs of individual students, Carleton offers and
supports a wide variety of off-campus study programs: Carleton faculty-led programs during term
or break periods, Carleton Global Engagement programs open to both Carleton and non-Carleton
students, and programs sponsored by other organizations.
Students expecting credit for participation in an off-campus program, whether in the United States
or abroad, during the academic year or the summer, must check with the Off-Campus Studies
Office, Leighton 119, for procedures, required forms, applications, and deadlines.
Carleton Off‐Campus Study Programs

Carleton offers a changing selection of terms, winter break, and spring break programs every year.
These programs offer a related group of courses designed and led by Carleton faculty for Carleton
students, using the resources of a site other than the Northfield campus. Students are selected by
application two to three terms preceding the actual program. Students pay the Carleton
comprehensive fee, which covers room, board, tuition, plus excursions and social events at the
program site. Transportation to the site, books, and personal expenses are the responsibility of each
student. Financial aid applies to these programs.
In addition to the Carleton term programs and break programs, students can choose a Carleton
Global Engagement program. These programs enroll students from institutions nationwide.



Carleton summer program participants must take a required leave of absence during the following
winter term.
Cancellation Policy: Carleton College shall have the right, at its option and without liability, to make
cancellations, changes, or substitutions in cases of emergency or changed conditions or in the
interest of the program.

422
Other Programs for Off‐Campus Study

Students can also select from hundreds of non-Carleton programs. Students who plan to participate
in non-Carleton programs must complete the OCS Application for Approval prior to participation.
Students participating in these programs pay a $500 administrative fee. The fee will be charged to
the student’s Carleton account after the Off-Campus Studies Office has approved the application.
Students who are approved for off-campus study by the College may earn up to 54 credits (one
year’s worth) to be applied to their Carleton degree. Financial aid applies to one non-Carleton offcampus study program approved by the College. Summer non-Carleton off-campus study programs
do not receive financial aid.
Students are encouraged to learn more about off-campus study opportunities and information about
specific programs by visiting the Off-Campus Studies office in Leighton 119 and by visiting its
website: go.carleton.edu/ocs.
Carleton Programs 2022‐23

Professional Preparation
Preparation for Professional Schools: Each year, many Carleton graduates and alumni continue their
education in a variety of professional and graduate schools. Carleton does not provide a set
curriculum for professional/graduate school preparation, and does not offer pre-professional (i.e.
pre-law, pre-med) majors. Instead, a regular program of studies in one of the established major
fields is recommended as the best preparation for further training. In consultation with their faculty
advisers, department chair, and other academic and career advisers, students can arrange a program
of study that best suits their own needs and objectives.
Students planning to enter any of the professions listed below should see the chair of their
department and the appropriate pre-professional adviser. The staff at the Career Center can provide
assistance to students who are seeking more information about these career fields as well as
internship and other exploratory opportunities and information.
ARCHITECTURE: Graduate schools of architecture do not require a specific major but most
require or recommend drawing (ARTS 110, see also ARTS 113 and 210), calculus, and physics. A
portfolio of visual materials is also required; students may want to take additional courses in studio
art to build up their portfolio. Courses in the history of art and architecture are further
recommended. For information consult the chair of the Department of Art and Art History.
BUSINESS AND MANAGEMENT: Many Carleton grads obtain careers in the management of
business firms, government agencies, and nonprofit enterprises. Potential employers as well as
graduate schools of business urge students to take courses in economics, mathematics, and statistics.
Interested students can discuss careers in these fields with the chair or any member of the
economics department, as well as with coaches in the Career Center.
CHEMISTRY: The American Chemical Society Certified Chemistry Major. The American
Chemical Society (ACS) is a professional society for chemists that has provided guidelines to
baccalaureate institutions on best practices for teaching chemistry to undergraduate students. An

423

ACS certified chemistry major requires more breadth and advanced study than the regular chemistry
major. Students interested in continuing in chemistry after graduation in either graduate school or
industry should consider the guidelines of the ACS certified chemistry major when planning their
studies.
EDUCATION: Preparation for Careers in Public Education: The Carleton College teaching
licensure program, in partnership with the St. Olaf College licensure program, is accredited by the
Professional Educator Licensing and Standards Board and is in full compliance with federal Title II
regulations for disclosure of state-mandated MTLE examination pass rates. For 2016-2017, the
most recent year for which data are available, the Carleton licensure candidate pass rates were
100% for all areas. See page 27 on this detailed Title II certified disclosure statement.
ENGINEERING: Carleton provides an option for a 3-2 Engineering Program, also called the DualDegree Program. The 3-2 program allows students to spend three years at Carleton and two years at
an engineering school receiving dual degrees, a B.A. from Carleton and a B.S. in Engineering from
a partner engineering institution. We currently have a formal partnership with Washington
University in St. Louis. There are also 4-2 (B.A./B.S.) and 3-3 (B.A./B.S./M.S.) versions of the
program available to interested students.
LAW: The best pre-law education is a rigorous liberal arts education. You won’t find a “pre-law”
major at Carleton. In fact, most law schools discourage such programs. Any Carleton major can be a
great background for someone considering a career in law. There are no specific courses you need
to take to prepare for law school, but your schedule should include as many courses as possible
requiring writing, oral analysis, research, and significant quantitative work. To help you prepare for
the types of logic problems that appear on the LSAT and in law school courses, PHIL 210 (Logic),
may be helpful.
An Accelerated Interdisciplinary Legal Education (AILE) Program is offered in cooperation with
Columbia University Law School. Under this plan a student combines three years of study at
Carleton with three years at Columbia Law School. After completion of the six year program, the
student is awarded two degrees, a BA degree from Carleton and a JD degree from Columbia.
Application should be made early in a student's junior year, but students interested in exploring this
program should visit with the pre-law advisor as early as possible after arriving at Carleton.
Any student interested in pursuing a career in law, should meet with Carleton’s pre-law adviser, RJ
Holmes-Leopold in the Career Center.
LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE: People with degrees in library and/or information
science are employed in a wide range of settings, including academic, public, school and specialized
libraries, archives, historical societies, and museums, as well as in business, government, and
information technology. A master’s degree from a school of library and information science
accredited by the American Library Association is the credential usually needed by those planning a
career in librarianship or related fields.
Any undergraduate major is acceptable for those planning to go to library school; however there is a
particular demand for people with science and social science backgrounds. Course work and
practical experience in organizing, retrieving, manipulating, and presenting information are highly
valued, as is teaching and working directly with information seekers. Students with an interest in

424

librarianship or related fields can gain practical experience through a wide variety of student jobs in
Carleton's library and Archives. Carleton’s librarians and archivists are always eager to talk with
students about work in library and information management settings. Contact the College Librarian
for a referral to a local librarian or other information professional.
HEALTHCARE: Students interested in pursuing careers in healthcare fields (medicine, dentistry,
veterinary medicine, public health, physical therapy and nursing, for example) should discuss their
plans and questions with pre-health advisor Pam Middleton during their first year at Carleton. Most
students who plan to enter schools of allopathic or osteopathic medicine major in a science, but a
major in any field is acceptable providing certain basic science courses are included. For detailed
information, see the pre-health program website.

Admissions
Admission to Carleton is based on several considerations. Of importance are superior academic
achievement, as demonstrated in the applicant’s school record and other supporting academic
materials; a depth of personal qualities and interests; participation in extracurricular activities; and
potential for development as a student and a graduate of the College. The Admissions Committee
weighs all factors to ensure that those students offered admission are not only adequately prepared
for the academic work, but also will benefit from their total experience at Carleton and add
significantly to the College through their individual talents, personal qualities, and perspectives.
Carleton strives to enroll a diverse student body in the fullest sense: varied racial, gender, ethnic,
socio-economic, religious, cultural and political backgrounds, as well as geographic origins of its
students. The College believes such diversity promotes spirited classroom discussion, provides an
opening to a variety of viewpoints and life experiences, helps prepare students for a diverse and
more inclusive workplace, and develops interpersonal skills for a pluralistic world.
There is no composite Carleton student. They possess a variety of qualities not measurable in
grades: warmth, openness, a sense of humor, an active interest in service and broader community
involvement, initiative, resourcefulness, motivation and courage. Although many applicants
numerically rank among the very best of their high school cohorts, many attractive candidates do
not. A significant number come from secondary schools where such numbers are not made available
on transcripts, or emerge from contexts where such restrictive quantitative measures do not
adequately assess the characteristics and drive which are so important to student success in
Carleton’s residential liberal arts environment.
Application for Admission: Students interested in applying for admission should visit Carleton’s
Admissions website. Each applicant is responsible for providing the admissions office with all items
requested.
Early Decision: Those who decide that Carleton is their first choice college are encouraged to
apply under the Early Decision program. Early Decision is a commitment to attend if accepted.
Students may submit applications to other colleges or universities, but not under another early
decision plan. Those accepted will be expected to withdraw all other applications. Early Decision
candidates are reviewed at two different times of the year, but whenever the student applies the
criteria for selection are identical. Students electing the Early Decision option should submit all
necessary materials by one of the following dates:

425



November 15. Applicants will receive decisions by December 15, and admitted candidates will have
until January 15 to submit their enrollment deposit.
January 15. Applicants will receive decisions by February 15, and admitted candidates will have
until March 1 to submit their enrollment deposit.

Regular Decision: Application deadline is January 15. Applicants on Regular Decision will receive
notification from the College by April 1 of the senior year. Those offered admission will have until
May 1 to confirm their enrollment.
Application Schedule for Fall Term Admission
Complete
Testing by:

File CSS Financial
Aid Profile
Application by:

Notification of
Admissions
Decisions On or
Before:

Applicant’s
Reply Date

Nov. 15

Nov. 15

Nov. 15

Dec. 15

Jan. 15

Winter
Early
Decision

Jan. 15

Dec. 31

Jan. 15

Feb. 15

March 1

Regular
Decision

Jan. 15*

Feb. 1

Jan. 15

April 1

May 1

Transfer

March 31*

Feb. 28

March 31

May 15

June 1

All Application
Materials Must Be
submitted by:

Fall Early
Decision

* Applications may be submitted after this date, but priority will be given to those applying on or
before the deadline. Initial enrollment deposits are returned to students upon graduation from the
College (minus expenses), and are otherwise nonrefundable.
Late Applicants: Students who submit applications after January 15 each year must recognize they
are applying on a space-if-available basis. In some years, the College is able to offer admission to
late applicants; in other years, the first-year student class may be filled and students to whom we
would like to offer admission must be placed on a waiting list to see if vacancies occur in late spring
or early summer.
Early Admission: Each year, a number of students apply for admission following the junior year of
high school. Some may be graduating early, others may be willing to forego the senior year to begin
college early. The College will consider such applications with the following understanding:
Successful Early Admission candidates almost always display a high degree of social and emotional
maturity, present unusually strong academic credentials and have exhausted their secondary school
curricular possibilities.
Deferred Admission: Deferred admission is not for an alternative college academic experience. If a
deferred student chooses to study elsewhere, credit will not be transferred to Carleton. Deferred

426

students who take post-secondary courses elsewhere cannot do so on a full-time basis or as a
degree-seeking student without violating the terms of their deferral. Candidates who wish to defer
college for a year (a gap year) following completion of secondary school may apply for
undergraduate admission during their senior year. The request for a gap year is submitted after an
offer of admission has been accepted, and should be accompanied by a statement describing the
candidate’s reasons for desiring a gap year, plans for the interim year and perceived benefits of the
delay. Such requests should be made by May 1.
Transfer Students: Carleton accepts a number of transfer students for each fall term. Students
wishing to apply for the fall term should submit applications prior to March 31 and will be notified
of the Admissions Committee’s decision before May 15. To qualify for the Carleton degree,
students must spend at least two years in residence including the senior year.
Requirements for Admission: The strongest candidates for admission to Carleton have taken four
years of English, three or more years of mathematics, two or more years of science and three or
more years of social science. At a minimum, applicants should have three or more years of English
(with a stress on writing), at least two years of algebra and a year of geometry, two years of social
science and one year of a laboratory science. Most Carleton students go well beyond this minimum,
and the Admissions Committee is usually attracted to candidates who take advantage of the
opportunity to do honors, advanced placement work, international baccalaureate work, or other
equally rigorous coursework. Normally, students will be expected to take two or more years of a
foreign or classical language unless it is not offered in the school. The greater the number of courses
in the subjects listed above, the more the applicant’s qualifications for admission are strengthened.
An applicant of unusual ability and interest whose secondary school program does not include all of
these courses may be granted admission on the basis of his or her school record, the scores on
standardized tests, and the recommendations of school officials.
Carleton recognizes achievement in the arts and encourages students to submit an art portfolio of
their work with their application. Once a student has applied to Carleton, they will receive a link
and password to their own application status page. They can submit supplementary material on their
application status page at go.Carleton.edu/appstatus.
By mid-August, enrolling students must provide a final high school transcript, or its equivalent,
showing successful completion of their secondary course work. Additionally, students must have
maintained an academic and personal record consistent with the records on which their admission to
Carleton was granted.
Admissions Testing: Carleton has adopted a test-optional policy through 2023, in the belief that
Admissions Committee can and does make sound judgments about candidates’ academic abilities
and ability to succeed at Carleton without such data points. Candidates for admission who wish to
share their test scores may do so, and they will be taken into account. However, it is not an
application requirement.
Students whose first or native language is not English should submit official scores from either the
TOEFL (Test of English as a Foreign Language), IELTS (International English Language Testing
System), or DET (DuoLingo English Test).
Interviews and Visits: When possible, each applicant may have a personal interview with a
member of the admissions office staff, an alumni admissions representative or a designated

427

representative of the College. Information on campus visit hours and options is detailed at our
website go.carleton.edu/visit. From June through August, the office is closed on Saturdays. The
admissions office is located in Scoville Hall, 100 South College Street (GPS address: 105 College
Street North, Northfield, MN).
Rooms: In the summer, all new students are assigned rooms which will be held until the first day of
registration. The College reserves the right to change students’ room assignments whenever such
changes are deemed advisable and to use student rooms for its own purpose during vacation
periods.
Financial Assistance: Carleton’s financial aid policy is based on the premise that the family has the
primary responsibility for meeting the expenses associated with attending the College, to the extent
they are able. Families applying for financial aid will undergo a “need analysis” to determine their
ability to contribute. The difference between the cost of attendance, as set by the College, and a
family’s expected contribution equals the demonstrated financial need, which Carleton will
endeavor to meet through grants, loans and work-study.
There is no separate Carleton application for financial aid. Carleton requires financial aid applicants
to complete both the Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) and the College Board’s
Financial Aid CSS Profile form.

Expenses
Comprehensive Fee
Students attending Carleton pay an all-inclusive fee, called a comprehensive fee, which is regarded
as an annual charge rather than the sum of charges for each term covering tuition, room, board, and
student activities. There are no special fees charged for laboratory work or field trips, or for
diplomas upon graduation. All students are entitled to admission without charge to most athletic
contests, concerts, plays, movies, lectures and other campus events. These activities as well as
subscriptions to the student publications are covered by the Carleton Student Association (CSA)
activity fee. For 2022-23 the comprehensive fee totals $78,624 and it is allocated as follows:





Tuition: $62,244
Room: $8,439
Board: $7,551
CSA Activity Fee: $390

Special Fees
The department of music offers private lessons in applied music. The fees for 2022-23 per term for
individual instruction in all instruments, and use of practice facilities are: after the drop/add
deadline, a term fee of $360 is billed to each student for weekly (normally 9) half-hour lessons (1
credit) per term, or $720 for weekly (normally 9) hour lessons (2 credits). Class Guitar and Class
African Drum are $100 each. Junior and senior music majors receive up to 4 credits per term of
lessons free of charge and music minors up to 2 credits per term free of charge. Students on
financial aid who experience difficulty in meeting the cost of private lessons may apply for financial
assistance for such expenses directly to the Student Financial Services Office.

428

Many art classes and various other classes require consumable materials and supplies which are not
included in the comprehensive fee; special fees may apply to these classes. Contact the Student
Financial Services Office for financial assistance eligibility requirements.
Student health insurance is available at additional cost for those not covered by another plan. Note:
proof of health insurance is required. For possible financial assistance to cover the cost of health
insurance, contact the Student Financial Aid Office for eligibility requirements.
For off-campus independent study, including summer reading not required for a fall term course,
the fee for each two credits or fraction thereof is the tuition for one credit during the academic year
in which the credit is granted.
Students participating in non-Carleton off-campus programs will be assessed a $500 administrative
fee. The fee will be charged to the student’s Carleton student account after the Off-Campus Studies
Petition has been approved.
Enrollment Deposit
In addition to the comprehensive fee, all enrolling students are required to pay and maintain an
enrollment deposit of $300, which functions as a confirming admissions deposit. $250 of this total
becomes a continuing enrollment deposit for subsequent years and the remaining $50 of the deposit
is used as a lifetime transcript fee, where students may request college transcripts from the Registrar
without cost. The deposit ($250) will be returned upon graduation. Any unpaid student account
obligation will be applied against this deposit at the time of graduation.
Calendar of Payments
When accepted (enrollment deposit)

$300

August 15

$26,208

December 15

$26,208

March 15

$26,208

Comprehensive Fee TOTAL

$78,624

Students are held responsible for payment of their college fees. Students receive e-mail
notifications, using the student’s Carleton e-mail address, when the term bills are available on-line.

429

Penalties
A student will not be permitted to register for the following term until his or her account has been
cleared by the Business Office. The student will be withdrawn from the College if the Business
Office has a financial block on the student’s account for a prior term’s past due balance. The student
will not be permitted to return to campus when classes start for the upcoming term. If otherwise
eligible, the student may apply for readmission for the subsequent term.
In cases of postponed account settlement, for which special arrangements are made in the Business
Office, a note must be signed covering the amount of the unpaid balance. An 8% per annum charge
will be made on postponed accounts.
College policies on deposits and refunds apply to Carleton off-campus study seminars; in addition, a
$500 penalty is assessed for late withdrawals before the start of the program. See the Carleton
Seminars Withdrawal policy.
Students who withdraw from a non-Carleton program are responsible for informing the program
provider and abiding by their withdrawal policies.
Refunds before a term starts
Students are eligible for a 100% refund of tuition, room, board and student activity fees if they have
paid for the upcoming term and subsequently withdraws or takes a leave of absence with
notification to the Dean of Students before the term starts.
Refunds after a term starts
If a student withdraws during the first ten days of classes and notifies the Dean of Students Office
by 5:00 p.m. on the tenth day of class a 25% tuition refund is available:
Term

Last day for a 25% tuition refund

Fall 2022

September 23, 2022

Winter 2023

January 17, 2023

Spring 2023

April 7, 2023

If a student leaves due to illness starting with the first day of class until the Monday of mid-term
break, as defined by the academic calendar, and notifies the Dean of Students Office by 5:00 p.m.
on the Monday of mid-term break, a 50% tuition refund is available:

430
Term

Last day for a 50% tuition refund

Fall 2022

October 17, 2022

Winter 2023

February 6, 2023

Spring 2023

May 1, 2023

Tuition Refund Conditions
Reason for leaving
Any

When Requested
Prior to start of term

Tuition amount
refunded
100%

Withdraw

Any day during the first ten days of class up to 5:00 pm on
25%
the tenth day of class

Withdraw

Any time after 5:00 pm on the tenth day of class and the
end of term

0%

Illness

Any time during the first day of class up to 5:00 pm on the
50%
Monday of mid‐term break

Illness

Any time after 5:00 pm on the Monday of mid‐term break 0%
and the end of the term

Suspended, Dismissed, or
After the start of the term
Expelled

0%

Room charges will not be refunded if a student leaves after the term starts.
Board charges will be refunded for the remaining weeks of the term.
Financial aid will be reduced according to the Return of Title IV Federal Student Aid Policy.
Applied music fees will not be charged to students who drop by the end of the drop/add period.
After the drop/add period music fees will be refunded pro-rata when a late drop is made for medical
reasons or in similar emergency situations.
Special provisions for military service are addressed by the Registrar.

431

If a student wishes to transfer to another institution he or she must settle their student account in the
Business Office by making necessary payments or arrangements for extension before a transcript of
credits will be issued.
No refunds will be made to students suspended, dismissed or expelled from the College.
A more restrictive refund policy governs withdrawal from Carleton off-campus programs. This
policy is explained in the Carleton Seminars Withdrawal policy.


Pandemic room and board refunds will be addressed by our emergency response procedures.

Credit Balance Policy
If a credit balance is created by federal Title IV funds it will be sent to the student with 10 business
days.

Housing and Residential Life
Financial Aid
Special Funds
Support of the College: As an independent, privately endowed institution, Carleton’s development
has been made possible by the support of interested individuals, foundations, and corporations.
Student tuition payments cover only about one-half of the College’s educational and general
expenses. Most of the balance comes from gifts for current purposes and from income earned by the
College’s endowment, which was itself provided by gifts.
Honorary Scholarships: WILLIAM CARLETON SCHOLARSHIPS, given to entering students
in memory of the man for whom Carleton is named, are honorary awards in recognition of
outstanding qualities of scholarship, character, and promise of achievement.

Endowed Scholarship Awards
Income from the endowed funds described here provides scholarship assistance to enable qualified
students to attend Carleton College. All scholarship recipients must maintain academic excellence
and must, unless otherwise noted, demonstrate financial need. Students need not apply for these
scholarships directly; they are awarded at the discretion of the College and administered as an
integral part of Carleton’s financial aid program. The minimum amount currently designated for
endowing and administering a new scholarship fund is $100,000.

Current Scholarship Awards
The following grants and awards provide scholarship money for students demonstrating financial
need. As with the endowed scholarship funds, students need not apply for these scholarships

432

directly; they are awarded at the discretion of the College and administered as an integral part of
Carleton’s financial aid program.
Class of 1983 Geology Scholarship
This scholarship was established in 2013 by Robert J. Alexander '83 and Don J. Frost Jr. '83 and
several other geology majors from the Class of 1983 on the occasion of their 30th reunion. The fund
supports geology majors with financial need.
Davies Scholarship
This scholarship was created by Mr. and Mrs. John Griffith Davies in 1983 for deserving students
who are supported by a single-parent household. Mrs. Davies, who is now deceased, was a single
parent for a time and understood the financial challenges single parents face. The Davies are the
parents of Wanda Davies, Carleton Class of 1978.
Davis United World College Scholarship
This scholarship was created by Mr. and Mrs. Shelby M. C. Davis in an effort to promote
international understanding through education.
Mary Fjelstad Facciani Music Scholarship
This scholarship was created in memory of Mary Fjelstad Facciani, Carleton Class of 1971, who
died in 1980. Her mother- and father-in-law, Clara and Rudolph Facciani, have continued to fund
the scholarship annually, preserving the memory of Mary and her love of music. The scholarship
provides assistance to junior and senior music students. Mr. and Mrs. Facciani's son (Mary's
husband), Gerald Facciani, graduated from Carleton in 1970.
George International Fellows Scholarship
This scholarship was created in 1999 by the George Family Foundation for the support of
international students at Carleton. The George family has a strong interest in supporting
international students and the perspective they bring to the academic community. For this reason,
the George family created the George International Fellows Scholarship for students from
developing nations who demonstrate economic need and exceptional academic potential and
promise.
Graduation Celebration Scholarship
The Graduation Celebration Scholarship Fund was established in 2013 by Barbara Levine in honor
of her granddaughter, Becca Greenstein '13, on the occasion of her graduation from Carleton.

433

Vernon James Pick Foundation Scholarship
This scholarship was created by the Vernon James Pick Foundation in 1994 to support junior and
senior science majors of outstanding merit, with preference for geology majors. Jim Hanson ’67 is
Mr. Pick’s nephew and serves as a Director and Treasurer for the Foundation.
Phyllis J. Powell '45 and Leslie Powell History Scholarship
This scholarship was established in 2013 by Leslie E. Powell in memory of her mother, Phyllis J.
Powell '45. It is to be awarded to a student with financial need majoring in history.
Carl D. Weiner and Paul D. Wellstone Scholarship
This scholarship was established in 2013 by Eric M. Robinson '88, and his wife Lisa, on the
occasion of his 25th Reunion. Financial aid will be given to students in good academic standing,
with demonstrated financial need, who have engaged in a notable manner with the College
community within and outside the classroom.
Mary Ann Gibson and James O. Wilkes Scholarship
Mary Ann Gibson ’55 and James O. Wilkes established this fund for financial aid support. This is in
addition to the Mary Ann Gibson and James O. Wilkes Endowed Scholarship Fund, which will be
funded with a bequest.

Fellowships and Prizes
The following prizes and research opportunities are open to all students in the groups indicated.
Carolyn Applebaum Prize in the Arts
The Carolyn Applebaum Prize in the Arts was established by Dr. Mark S. Applebaum '89 and Ms.
Joan Friedman in 2014 in memory of Carolyn Applebaum, Mark's sister. Carolyn was devoted to
theater and worked as a drama teacher. She was an advocate, cheerleader, mentor, and friend to her
students. The prize recognizes students who have made a meaningful impact on the arts in student
life.
Rajaletchemy Balasingam Women’s and Gender Studies Prize
The Rajaletchemy Balasingam Women's and Gender Studies Prize was created by Dashini
Jeyathurai '08 to honor the best academic writing in the Women's and Gender Studies Program. She
named the prize after the first feminist in her life, her mother Rajaletchemy Balasingam. The annual
gift can be awarded to any student in a Women's and Gender Studies course that submits a
superlative piece of academic writing in the field. The prize submission and awarding process will
be administered by the Women's and Gender Studies Program faculty.

434

John K. Bare Prize in Psychology
Established in 1983, this prize, endowed by his students, colleagues, friends, and family, is awarded
annually to members of the senior class who have demonstrated outstanding achievement in the
study of psychology. The prize was created to honor Professor John Bare for his many contributions
to his students, to Carleton's Department of Psychology, and to teaching in American psychology
more generally.
James S. Berglund Social Science Prize
Established in memory of James S. Berglund '61 by his friends and classmates, this prize is awarded
for the best essay or research paper in the social sciences.
Scott Tyler Bergner Prize
This prize recognizes members of the senior class who have outstanding academic records and who
have demonstrated excellence of thought and character. This prize was established in 1978 to honor
the memory of Scott Tyler Bergner, son of Jeffrey T. Bergner '69 and Susan D. Bergner '69.
Warren L. Beson Memorial Award
Awarded for athletic and academic excellence to seniors who have achieved one or more accolades
in any sport and have a high scholastic average, this award was established in memory of former
Carleton football coach, Warren L. Beson.
Catherine E. Boyd Prize in Medieval and Renaissance Studies
Established in 2001 by anonymous donors, this prize honors Professor Catherine E. Boyd, a
renowned medieval historian and member of the history faculty (1947-1966). The prize is awarded
for the best research essays in any relevant field.
Carleton Science Fellowship
The Carleton Science Fellowship program, which was established in 2009, serves to broaden
participation of historically underrepresented groups in the sciences. The Science Fellowship
provides mentoring and two summers of research laboratory experience, and is supported by
funding from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute.
Charles Carlin Prize in Chemistry
This prize was established in 2011 by Charles H. Carlin, Charles "Jim" and Marjorie Kade
Professor of the Sciences, Emeritus. The prize honors senior chemistry majors whose enjoyment of
chemistry and gracious good humor has inspired and assisted others in the field.

435

Mike Casper Award
The Barry M. "Mike" Casper Award was established in 2011 by the environmental studies (ENTS)
program to honor the memory of Mike Casper, professor of physics from 1966 to 2003 and longtime cornerstone of the environmental studies program at Carleton. This prize honors the graduating
ENTS majors who best personify Professor Casper's commitment to superior academic achievement
and his energy and leadership in support of understanding and protecting the environment.
Class of 1885 Prize
Judged by members of the English department, this prize is awarded annually to the Carleton
students who submit the best work of imagination in prose.
Class of 1963 Fellowship
This fellowship was established by the Class of 1963 on the occasion of their 25th Reunion and
provides opportunities for qualified students to pursue intellectual or creative interests.
Class of 1966 Diversity of Achievement Award
The Class of 1966 Diversity of Achievement Award is given to Carleton students who have made a
unique or distinctive contribution to the College or the community. The recipients have
demonstrated excellence in their own way in such diverse areas as the arts, community service,
student government, academic research, or other areas of contribution.
Margaret Dalton Curran Prize
Established in 1986 by family and friends of Margaret Dalton Curran '26, this prize recognizes
Curran's lifelong interest in excellent writing, which she developed at Carleton. It is awarded
annually by the English department faculty to students submitting the most accomplished academic
essay.
Dana Award for Personal Achievement
Established in memory of the Reverend Malcolm McGregor Dana, who was a Carleton trustee from
1878 to 1888, this award is given annually to young men in the senior class who during four years
at Carleton have achieved a balance of high scholarship, exceptional leadership abilities, and
outstanding Christian character. The award is made in the hope that these qualities will be dedicated
to public service.
Davis Projects for Peace
The Davis Projects for Peace Initiative allows students at schools associated with the Davis United
World College Scholars Program to design and implement their own grassroots "projects for peace."
The initiative was established in 2007 by Kathryn Wasserman Davis in commemoration of her
100th birthday. Davis was a lifelong internationalist and philanthropist and the mother of Davis
United World College Scholars Program namesake Shelby M.C. Davis.

436

Dimsdale Prize for Undergraduate Medical Research
The Dimsdale Prize is awarded to students with outstanding academic achievement who are
interested in pursuing a career in medicine. The prize, which is awarded to students having
completed at least their sophomore year, supports off-campus research or other experiences that
would help prepare students for medical school.
David C. Donelson '77 Fellowship
The David C. Donelson '77 Fund was established in memory of Mr. Donelson who treasured
learning and a free spirit. The fellowship is intended to support the very spirit of a liberal arts
education through the funding of a student or students to, in the words of Walt Whitman, “loaf and
invite the soul” through a special project, trip, or other initiative. The award is meant simply to
broaden intellectual, cultural, or creative horizons of its recipients.
Roy Elveton Prize
The Roy O. Elveton Prize Fund in Cognitive Science and Philosophy was established in 2014 in
commemoration of the retirement of Roy Elveton, the Maxine H. and Winston R. Wallin Professor
of Philosophy and Cognitive Science. Roy joined the faculty in 1968 and was instrumental in
founding the interdisciplinary program in cognitive science at Carleton. The Roy Elveton Prize will
honor two senior students a year: the cognitive science student and philosophy student judged to
excel in their senior integrative exercise (comps).
Mike Ewers Award from the Minnesota Space Grant Consortium
Colin Michael "Mike" Ewers drowned in the Tanama River near Puerto Rico in 2003 while on a
research trip to the Arecibo Radio Observatory. He would have graduated with the Class of 2004.
This prize is awarded to junior or senior students involved in space-related research who best
exemplify Mike's vision for the exploration of space and his enthusiasm for public outreach.
David John Field Prize
This prize is awarded each year to members of the senior class whose nonathletic activities best
exhibit the qualities of imagination, ingenuity, energy, verve, and zest for life that David Field '64
exemplified while living joyfully with his fellow students.
James Finholt Prize in Inorganic Chemistry
This prize was established by friends and colleagues in honor of the 42 years of service of professor
James E. Finholt to the chemistry department at Carleton. The prize is awarded each year to
graduating seniors who excelled in the study of inorganic chemistry and who share the type of
enthusiasm and love of the molecular world exhibited by Professor Finholt.

437

Winfield A. Foreman Jr. '37 Endowed Scholarship
This scholarship was created in 2005 by Mr. Foreman's wife, Alice, in honor of her husband's 90th
birthday. Winfield A. Foreman Jr. graduated summa cum laude from Carleton in 1937 with a degree
in economics. He became involved in a number of business enterprises including Foreman & Clark,
a clothing company founded by his father, and later became vice president at John Wanamaker, a
department store in Philadelphia. During WWII, Mr. Foreman served in the Navy and ended his
military career as a Lieutenant Senior Grade. The Winfield A. Foreman Jr. '37 Endowed
Scholarship for Academic Excellence is awarded to economics majors who are U.S. citizens and
demonstrate great academic promise. The scholarship encourages students to pursue communityinspired business and service, as modeled by Winfield A. Foreman Jr.
Four Friends Fellowship
The Four Friends Fellowship was established in 2012 with gifts to the college from Danal Abrams
'80, Jeff Appelquist '80, Peter Ross '80, and John Youngblood '81 (collectively, the "Four Friends")
in appreciation for all the experiences they have had together since meeting at Carleton in the late
70s. The Fellowship is awarded to a group of two or more Carleton students who propose a
compelling, feasible experience off campus.
Steven P. Galovich Prize in Mathematics
This prize was established in 2009 by the generosity of alumni and friends to honor the memory of
Steve Galovich, professor of mathematics from 1974 to 1994. The prize honors graduating
mathematics majors who best reflect Professor Galovich's enthusiasm for and love of mathematics,
zestful joy in life, sense of humor, and compassion for others.
Talia Goldenberg '12 Award in Studio Art
This award recognizes senior studio art majors receiving distinction on their comprehensive
exercise who also have extraordinary promise and embody Talia's spirit of community and
humaneness. Selections are made by the art department. This award was established in 2014 to
honor the memory of Talia Goldenberg '12. Talia exhibited delight in the world, compassion for
others, and courage and tenacity in facing life's challenges.
Goodsell Award
This award is given to the graduating seniors whose service and enthusiasm best exemplify support
for the astronomy program at Goodsell Observatory. The award honors the long-standing tradition
of astronomical observing and public outreach at Carleton College.
Laurence McKinley Gould Prize in Natural Science
This prize was established in 1979 to recognize the accomplishments made to science research and
to liberal education by Laurence McKinley Gould, who served as Carleton's president from 1945 to
1962. The prize is awarded annually to members of the senior class who have demonstrated
excellence in experimental scientific research either in biology, chemistry, geology, physics, or

438

psychology and who have studied one of the other humanities at a level well beyond the minimum
college requirements.
Professor Roy F. Grow Endowed Fellowship Fund
Established in 2014, the Professor Roy F. Grow Fellowship Fund celebrates the career and life of
Roy F. Grow, the Frank B. Kellogg Professor of International Relations, Emeritus. Created by
Michael Hasenstab '95 and Mary Hasenstab, and contributed to by many students, colleagues,
family, and friends of Roy, the fund supports student fellowship and research opportunities in Asia.
Ele Hansen Award
This award is given annually to two senior female students who bring to sport the joy of
participation and who have positively influenced others through their example, service, and
leadership in the athletic or recreation program. This award also publicly honors Professor Eleanor
Hansen, chair of the women's physical education department from 1952 to 1986, in appreciation for
the generosity, enthusiasm, and warmth she shared with generations of Carleton students. It is
endowed by a fund created by her friends, colleagues, and former students at the time of her
retirement in 1986.
Dale and Elizabeth Hanson Fellowship in Ethics
This fellowship, made possible through the generosity of Dale Hanson '60 and Elizabeth Hanson,
supports student research in the field of ethics. Hanson Fellows partner closely with faculty
members, and are expected to produce an academic paper, public presentation, or other product
based on their research at the conclusion of the fellowship.
Ada M. Harrison Prize in Economics
This prize recognizes the outstanding academic achievements of graduating economics majors for
coursework and independent study in the field of economics at Carleton. It publicly honors
Professor Ada M. Harrison and was established in 1979 by her former students, friends, and
colleagues at the time of her retirement from 30 years of distinguished service to Carleton.
Honors in Independent Study
This award is presented for outstanding independent work. Such recognition is based solely on the
excellence of the special project and is considered independently of a student's academic average or
other qualifying factors. The independent study project need not be in the student's major field and
may be awarded to a student in any class year.
Honors in Music Performance
This award celebrates music students, majors and nonmajors, for excellence in performance and
significant contributions as performers.

439

Huntington Poetry Prize
Endowed in memory of George Huntington, poet, novelist, and professor of logic, rhetoric, and
elocution at Carleton from 1879 to 1906, this prize recognizes distinguished work in poetry.
Independent Research Fellowship
These fellowships are awarded to enable qualified students to carry out independent research
activities in any field taught at the College or to undertake projects in the creative and performing
arts.
Andrea Grove Iseminger '59 Fund for Off‐Campus Studies
The Andrea Grove Iseminger '59 Fund for Off-Campus Studies was created in 2001 to honor
Andrea Grove Iseminger '59 and her distinguished service to Carleton as the director of off-campus
studies. The awards are made competitively and are intended to remove financial barriers to
participation in Carleton-sponsored off-campus study programs.
Jonathan Paradise Israel Experience Fund
This fund was established by Mansoor Alyeshmerni, Carleton's Hebrew instructor for many years,
to honor his teacher, Professor Jonathan Paradise. Its purpose is to provide financial support to
Carleton students who wish to learn more about the culture, history, and politics of Israel in order to
better understand the global community in which we live. Students must be enrolled in Israel in a
structured educational program, which need not be through a university.
Jefferson Natural Sciences Teaching Award
Given annually to current students who have demonstrated an interest in and capacity for teaching
children or adults in the natural sciences, this award is named in honor of Constance Jefferson
Sansome '68 and her family, many of whom are or have been extraordinary teachers of the natural
sciences. The award may be used for any purpose that furthers the student's teaching career.
Ursula Hemingway Jepson Memorial Award
This award recognizes outstanding junior studio art students. The award was established in 1968 by
Jasper Jepson to honor his wife, Ursula Hemingway Jepson, both members of the Class of 1925.
Paul and Lynn Kelley International Fellowship
The Kelley Fellowship was created to honor Paul and Lynn Kelley, who have done a great deal to
support and promote cultural understanding, including medical travels to Central America, yearslong service to indigenous and tribal peoples, AIDS work, and much more. The fund is intended to
support students with financial need who are doing research fellowships abroad.

440

Kolenkow Reitz Fund for Undergraduate Research
The Robert J. Kolenkow and Robert A. Reitz Fund for Undergraduate Research was established by
David Ignat '63 in 2007 to support students pursuing research projects during summer or winter
breaks. The fund honors Ignat's past mentors in the physics department at Carleton, Professors
Robert J. Kolenkow and Robert A. Reitz. The fund seeks to expand the opportunities for research
beyond Carleton's campus to research universities, including areas that are not always well
represented at an undergraduate college.
Ian Kraabel Memorial Prize
Established in 1987 by the classmates and friends of Ian Kraabel '85, who died in an avalanche on
Mount Baker in the summer of 1986, this award honors Kraabel's unusual intensity, originality, and
athletic ability. The prize is awarded each year by the history department to a history major who
best reflects Kraabel's personal qualities and his desire to pursue knowledge and understanding.
Pat Lamb Award
This award is given to outstanding senior female athletes who have achieved athletic excellence and
a high level of academic achievement. Awards are given for both team sports and individual sports.
The award publicly honors Pat Lamb, Carleton's first director of women's athletics (19701985). Professor Lamb was an influential leader in the early development of increased
opportunities for women not only at Carleton, but also at state, regional, and national levels. This
award is endowed by a fund created by colleagues, former students, and friends upon Lamb's
retirement in 1994.
Sigrid and Erling Larsen Award in Performing Arts
This award honors the memory of Sigrid Larsen '62 and her father, Erling Larsen, professor of
English at Carleton from 1956 to 1974. It is made annually to students who, either as creators or
performers, have done the most memorable or distinguished work in literature, music, drama, art,
dance, photography, or film.
Larson International Fellowship
This fellowship was established in 1986 by Robert Larson '56, John Larson '60, and David Larson
'63 in memory of their parents, Frances W. and Eugene Larson, who had a deep interest in Carleton
and were champions of international understanding and involvement. The fellowship fund enables
students with leadership promise to have a significant international summer experience.
Clare Boothe Luce Research Scholars Program
The Clare Boothe Luce Research Scholars Program was established through a grant from The
Henry Luce Foundation. Awards support female science majors who are pursuing summer research
projects in physics and astronomy, computer science, or interdisciplinary research related to these
fields.

441

David Maitland ‐ Robert Will Prize
Pastor Kirbyjon H. Caldwell '75 and his wife, Suzette, established this prize in honor of Professor
David J. Maitland and Professor Robert E. Will '50, both of whom had a major impact on Pastor
Caldwell when he was a student. This prize recognizes qualities important in defining a Carleton
education-in this instance, involvement in one's community. It is awarded to students who are
completing their sophomore year and have shown the greatest capacity for transforming their
community through service.
Mellon Mays Undergraduate Fellowship
The Mellon Mays Undergraduate Fellowship program, which was established in 1989 and is funded
by grants from the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, provides mentoring and research opportunities
for students committed to increasing the diversity of the American professoriate by pursuing
doctorates in the humanities, select social sciences, and sciences, and eventually a career in higher
education.
Jerry Mohrig Prize in Chemistry
This prize was established in 2006 by friends and students of Jerry R. Mohrig, professor of
chemistry from 1967 to 2003, in honor of his many contributions to Carleton. The award
recognizes outstanding senior chemistry majors who have excelled in the study of chemistry and
undergraduate scientific research. The award recognizes two hallmarks of excellence: achievement
in formal academic coursework and success in a significant research experience.
Mortar Board Prize
The Mortar Board Prize, established by its members, is awarded each year for the purchase of books
to a member or members of the previous first-year class who has achieved a distinguished grade
point average.
Dacie Moses Award
Established by the Alumni Association to celebrate the warmth, generosity, and hospitality of
Candace K. "Dacie" Moses, who contributed so much to the lives of Carleton students. This award
is given each year to the senior or seniors who most exemplify the characteristics of Dacie Moses.
William Muir Scholars
This fund was established in 1985 to support the biology department. The fund provides a stipend
for outstanding juniors interested in plant sciences.
Edward "Ted" Mullin Memorial Fellowship in History
The Edward "Ted" Mullin Fellowship in History was established in memory of Ted, who lost his
life to cancer in September 2006 while he was a student at Carleton. The fellowship is awarded to
junior history majors to support research opportunities in the field of history that enhance a student's

442

academic or broader learning journey. The fellowship recipients, selected by the history department,
exemplify Ted's love of history, academic excellence, selflessness, courage, and tenacity.
Philip H. Niles Prize in Medieval and Renaissance Studies
Established in 2001 by an anonymous donor, this award is presented for the best short essays in any
related field and honors Philip H. Niles, a member of the history faculty (1966-1999) and the first
director of the medieval studies concentration/minor.
Noyes Prize
The Noyes Prize was founded in 1908 by Daniel R. Noyes of St. Paul. Distinguished scholars are
selected from a list of eligible members of the senior class based on grade point average.
Phi Beta Kappa First Year Prize
Phi Beta Kappa Prizes are offered annually by the Carleton Chapter of Phi Beta Kappa to the
sophomore who in the previous year held the highest class ranking in scholarship among the
members of his or her respective class.
Phi Beta Kappa Second Year Prize
Phi Beta Kappa Prizes are offered annually by the Carleton Chapter of Phi Beta Kappa to the junior
who in the previous year held the highest class ranking in scholarship among the members of his or
her respective class.
David Pollatsek '96 Prize in Computer Science
This prize, established in 2013 by family and friends of David Pollatsek '96, is awarded each year to
computer science majors who best reflect David's special strengths: his intellectual curiosity, his
creativity, his imaginative programming, his love of art, and his flair for design.
Reeve Prize
The Reeve Prize was established in 1881 in memory of Minnie A. Reeve of Minneapolis.
Distinguished scholars are selected from a list of eligible members of the senior class based on
grade point average.
Warren Ringlien Memorial Prize
The Warren Ringlien Memorial Prize honors graduating physics majors who have demonstrated the
ability to construct complicated scientific instruments and then use them in real applications.
Warren Ringlien was Carleton's instrument maker for many years, and had the ability to build
wonderful devices for use in the sciences. This prize recognizes students who have similar skills.

443

Rachel Rosenfeld Prize
The Rachel A. Rosenfeld Prize for Excellence in the Study of Sociology and Anthropology was
established in 2011 in memory of Rachel A. Rosenfeld '70, professor of sociology at the University
of North Carolina, Chapel Hill. The prize is awarded each spring by the sociology and anthropology
department to a senior who exhibits promise in making professional contributions in the areas of
sociology or anthropology, a high level of intellectual curiosity, courage in the face of challenges,
devotion to our community, and enthusiasm for making connections between social theory and
practice.
Allen and Irene G. Salisbury Student Fellowship
The Allen and Irene G. Salisbury Student Fellowship was established by Richard A. Salisbury '66
and Irene G. Salisbury and recognizes the service of James F. Fisher, the John W. Nason Professor
of Asian Studies and Anthropology, Emeritus. This endowed fund supports student research
fellowships in any field taught at Carleton or projects in the creative or performing arts. Preference
is given to students who are studying any aspect of Nepal or Asia.
Richard Salisbury Student Fellowship
This fellowship was established by Richard A. Salisbury '66 to provide junior or senior students
with valuable opportunities for independent research in any field taught at the College or to allow
students to undertake projects in the creative or performing arts. Preference is given to students who
are studying in Latin America or Africa.
Jean Schmidt Prize
Established in 1973 in memory of Jean Schmidt '73, the prize is awarded each year to members of
the graduating class who best exemplify Schmidt's enthusiasm for learning and love of people.
Second Century Student Award
This award was established to honor Carleton students who have made an outstanding contribution
to the College through significant service to others. The award is not intended to recognize
academic or political success, but rather to honor service on or off campus that enriches and
strengthens the institution and the lives of its members.
Harriet Sheridan Endowed Prize
Pastor Kirbyjon H. Caldwell '75 and his wife, Suzette, established this prize in honor of Harriet
Sheridan, former acting president, dean, and professor of English, who had a major impact on
Pastor Caldwell when he was a student. Additional funding has been provided by John Bullion '74
and his wife, Betty. The purpose of the prize is to recognize qualities that are important in defining
a Carleton education—in this instance, writing ability.

444

Lee Sigelman Prize
The Lee Sigelman Prize honors Professor of Political Science Lee Sigelman, who graduated from
Carleton College in 1967 and served as the editor-in-chief of the American Political Science
Review from 2001-2007. The prize recognizes the best paper written by a junior political science
major.
Bardwell Smith Prize for Excellence in the Study of Religion
Established in 2006 on the occasion of the 50th anniversary of Carleton's religion department, this
prize celebrates the leadership and career of Bardwell L. Smith, the John W. Nason Professor of
Religion and Asian Studies, Emeritus. The award honors Professor Smith's intellectual legacy of
cross-cultural study and commitment to lifelong learning. The prize is awarded by the religion
department to students who exhibit a passion for the life of the mind, a willingness to take
intellectual risks, and a desire to grow and change as young scholars.
Ellen Rogers Steif Memorial Award
Established by the family and friends of Ellen Steif '77, who died in the fall of 1979, this award
honors Steif's interest in history and her personal courage in the face of death during a long and
painful illness. The prize is awarded each year by the history department to history majors who best
reflect Steif's personal qualities and academic achievements.
Duncan Stewart Fellows
Each spring the geology department selects Duncan Stewart Fellows from the junior and senior
classes. This fellowship was established in 1976 by Daniel Gainey '49 in honor of Duncan Stewart,
professor of geology at Carleton for nearly 25 years. The principal criteria for selection are
excellence in scholarship, a high level of intellectual curiosity, potential for scientific growth, a
demonstrated ability to work independently, and involvement in department activities.
Stewsie Sustainability Award
The Stewsie Sustainability Award is given to Carleton students whose characters reflect the
determination, conviction, and innovation of the lifelong service of Dresdon Blake Stewart, better
known as "Stewsie." Concluding a varied career at Carleton as superintendent of grounds, Stewsie
served the College for more than 50 years, eventually receiving the title "landscape architect."
Never found without a shovel in hand, he was dedicated to improving his community's environment
and keeping strong his deep convictions about preserving the natural order of the local habitat.
Stimson Prize
This prize was founded in 1873 by Carleton Trustee Reverend Henry A. Stimson to encourage
public speech. It is awarded to students who contribute most to the quality of debate or public
speaking at the College.

445

Frank E. Stinchfield Prize
This prize is named for Dr. Frank E. Stinchfield '32, H '60. The prize was established at his request,
but after his death, through the Margaret and Frank Stinchfield Foundation. The prize is awarded to
academically outstanding members of the senior class.
Samuel Strauss Prize
Endowed in 1982 by Robert S. Strauss '73 in memory of his father, this prize is awarded to
recognize accomplished humorous writing.
Mel Taube Award
Awarded for exceptional loyalty, dedication, and achievement in varsity athletics, the recipients of
this award must be graduating seniors who have participated in at least two sports with emphasis on
team sports in at least one category. Taube served as Carleton's athletic director from 1960 to 1970
and head basketball coach from 1950 to 1960.
Technos International Week Fellows
The Tanaka Ikueikai Educational Trust invites two students and a faculty member from select
institutions in the United States, England, and New Zealand to participate in Technos International
Week. The two-week program encourages cultural understanding between the program's guest
participants and the students and faculty members of Technos College in Tokyo, Japan.
Technos International Prize
Presented to a graduating senior for outstanding academic achievement and a commitment to
furthering the cause of international understanding, this award is balanced by a similar award given
by Carleton to a student at Technos College in Tokyo.
Carleton Toni Award in the Arts
This prize, established in 1996 in honor of Antoinette (Toni) Sostek, dance instructor at Carleton
from 1971 to 1996, is awarded to juniors or seniors who embody the spirit of Sostek's teachings
through artistic expression. The following attributes summarize the people with that spirit: finds the
fun in shared experience, understands that major challenges are overcome through small steps and
small triumphs, exults in the joy of personal achievement, and does not let personal limitations or
conventional wisdom discourage creative expression.
VOP Fellowship
The VOP Fellowship was established by Pauline Vo Benson '97 to provide scholarships to Carleton
students studying abroad in Japan, South Korea, China, Taiwan, Vietnam, Thailand, Cambodia,
Malaysia, the Philippines, Laos, Burma, and Nepal. In helping students gain a global perspective, it
is hoped that recipients will seek opportunities to participate in activities that are greater than
themselves.

446

Ann Goodson Weiner Prize in Theater and Dance
This prize was established in 2004 by Carl and Ruth Weiner and is also supported annually by
Robert Weiner to honor Ann Goodson Weiner, who is Carl and Robert Weiner's mother and Ruth
Weiner's mother-in-law. This prize is awarded annually to students who, in the judgment of the
section leaders of the theater and dance department, have contributed the most significant
performance in theater or dance. The purpose of the prize is to honor Ann Goodson Weiner and
recognize the hard work and dedication involved in creating a truly inspirational performance.
Mary Wiese Endowed Prize
Established in 1992 to honor the memory of Carleton employee and parent Maria "Mary" Eugenia
Wiese, this prize honors Wiese's respect for education, her profound love for students, and her
understanding of the place of education in their futures. Qualities Wiese valued in others and that
formed the core of her own character were: cultural pride, kindness, perseverance, self-reliance,
discipline, and respect and care for other people. This prize is awarded to graduating seniors who
embody the above qualities and who have demonstrated perseverance in overcoming challenging
circumstances. To honor the pride Wiese had in her Latino culture, preference is given to Latino
students.
Robert E. Will Economics Prize
This prize was established by alumnae, faculty, and friends of Robert E. Will '50, Raymond Plank
Professor of Incentive Economics, Emeritus, to honor his professional time spent at Carleton. The
prize is awarded to the senior economics majors who demonstrate excellent academic achievement
and breadth of intellectual interests in the best tradition of the liberal arts education.
Williams‐Harris Prize in African American Studies
This prize was established on history professor Harry Williams's 50th birthday to honor his mother,
Edith Moselle Harris Williams (1931-1992); his grandmother, Patsy Harris Tunson (1914-1998);
and his great-aunt, Ellen Harris Brooks (1909-1998). This prize recognizes their respect for the
transformative power of education, the vast richness of their life experiences, and the strength of
their character. The prize recognizes members of the senior class who have produced a
distinguished integrative exercise on any aspect of the African American experience in the New
World.
Neil Isaacs and Frank Wright '50 Fellowship
This fellowship was established in 2007 by Ian Isaacs '77 and Cliff Wright '78 to honor their fathers,
Neil Isaacs and Frank Wright '50. The award supports fellowship or internship opportunities that
enable students to pursue their professional interests in investigative journalism.
Laurence and Lucille Wu Family Endowed Fund
This fund supports joint study and research projects of faculty and students with emphasis on the
collaboration between faculty and students. Ideally, the fund will foster not only scholarship, but
close friendships between faculty members and students.

447

Yueh‐Townsend Asian Fellowship
The Yueh-Townsend Asian Fellowship Fund was created by Emily Yueh ’02 and Seth Townsend in
2013. Emily's studies at Carleton included an off-campus experience with Professor Roy Grow,
which ultimately led to Emily’s passion and curiosity for international studies. By establishing this
fund, Emily is giving Carleton students who have completed their first year a similar opportunity to
expand their cultural understanding and complement their academics through study in Asia. The
Yueh-Townsend Asian Fellowship Fund will support research or other experiences in Asia (defined
as East Asia, Southeast Asia and South Asia) during either summer or winter breaks.

Trophy Awards
The following trophy awards are made annually to individual students in the groups indicated.
The Warren L. Beson Memorial Award for athletic and academic excellence is given to a senior
who has won one or more awards in any sport, has a high scholastic average, and is unanimously
recommended by the Director of Athletics, the Dean of Students, the faculty representative to the
Minnesota Intercollegiate Athletic Conference, and the officers of the “C” Club. The award is not
necessarily given annually.
The C. J. Hunt Football Award was established in 1957 by Carleton alumni in the Twin Cities
area to honor Mr. C. J. Hunt, who was head football coach and Director of Athletics at Carleton
from 1913 to 1917 and from 1920 to 1931. The award is given annually to the Carleton football
player who has shown the most improvement during the current season.
The Kelly Memorial Baseball Award was established in 1949 by Mr. and Mrs. Thomas R. Kelly
of Owatonna, Minnesota, as a memorial to their son, Lieutenant James M. Kelly, Class of 1945.
Lieutenant Kelly, an officer in the United States Army, died in France on September 1, 1944, of
wounds received in the Battle for Brest. The trophy is awarded each year to the player making the
most outstanding contribution to the Carleton baseball team.
The William S. And Mary Agnes Kelly Memorial Award was established in 1988 by Mr. Kelly’s
children and friends as a memorial tribute and to honor one male and female track athlete annually
judged by the coaches as the most improved track team members. Mr. and Mrs. Kelly were the
parents of two Carleton alumni: William S. Kelly, Jr., Class of 1957, and Thomas S. Kelly, Class of
1960.
The Lippert Memorial Football Award was established in 1953 by Mr. and Mrs. Cort Lippert of
Northfield, Minnesota. Cort Lippert, Class of 1939, is a brother of Lieutenant James A. Lippert,
United States Army Air Corps, who died in 1943 in Italy. The trophy, a memorial to Lieutenant
Lippert, is awarded each year to the player who contributes the most to the Carleton football team.
The John M. Millen Track Award, established in 1959 by Mr. Theodore Kolderie, Class of 1926,
is presented to the athlete “who has contributed the most in the interest of track.” The award
memorializes John M. Millen, track coach and resident head of men’s dormitories at Carleton from
1923 until his death in 1930.

448

The Stephen F. Smith Memorial Cross Country AwARD was established in 1966 by the family
and friends of Stephen F. Smith, who drowned in a boating accident during the summer of his junior
year. It is presented annually to the athlete who displays the greatest dedication to cross country
running and to Carleton athletics.
The Mike Stam Memorial Award was established in 1988 by friends and family of Mike Stam
’89, a Carleton athlete who died in a snowmobiling accident in January of 1988. The award is
presented to the outstanding defensive lineman in the MIAC as voted on by the MIAC coaches.
The Mel Taube Award, established in 1980 by the Alumni “C” Club and other friends, is given for
dedication, loyalty, competitive spirit, and excellence in varsity athletics. The award, presented in
memory of Melvin H. Taube, who coached at Carleton from 1950 to 1970, is not necessarily given
annually.
The Marc Von Trapp Spirit Award was created by family, friends and teammates in 1998 to
memorialize Marc von Trapp, Class of 2000, who died during his sophomore year. The award is
presented annually to the most outstanding member of the Carleton College Hockey Team who
contributes the most both on and off the ice. The Marc von Trapp Spirit Award is the highest honor
given to a Carleton hockey player.
The Warnecke Swimming Award was established in 1956 by Mr. Frederic E. Warnecke of
Evanston, Illinois. It is presented each year to the senior swimmer who has made the greatest
contribution to the Carleton swim team.
The Matt Zell Sophomore Player Award was established in 1968 by his former teammates, as a
memorial to Major Matthew N. Zell IV, Class of 1959, who died in 1967. The trophy is awarded
each year to a sophomore football player for dedication and loyalty to the Carleton football team.

Alumni
Board of Trustees
The Faculty
Administrative Offices
9/6/2022

449

