COURSE
COURSE CATALOG
CATALOG2022–2023
2022–2023

CONVOCATION

Friday, September 9, 2022

FALL TERM

Monday, September 12—Friday, November 18, 2022

WINTER TERM

Monday, January 9—Friday, March 17, 2023

SPRING TERM

Monday, April 3—Friday, June 9, 2023

COMMENCEMENT

Saturday, June 10, 2023

College of the Atlantic is accredited by the New England Commission of
Higher Education.
COA does not discriminate on the basis of race, color, gender, sexual
orientation, gender identity or expression, disability, religion, ancestry
or national origin, age, marital status, genetic information, or veteran’s
status. COA operates in accordance with federal and state laws regarding
nondiscrimination.
This catalog is the most complete representation of the current academic
offerings and policies available. The college reserves the right to
make changes in course offerings, degree requirements, regulations,
procedures, and charges as new needs arise.
This publication is printed on 10% post consumer recycled paper that is
chlorine and acid free.

Cover artwork adapted from illustration by Jara Lastra ’22

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC
COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023
PART I
HUMAN ECOLOGY: AN EDUCATIONAL APPROACH
WHAT YOU SHOULD LEARN AT COA
INTRODUCTION
MISSION AND VISION
ACADEMIC PROGRAM AND POLICIES
DEGREE REQUIREMENTS

4
4
5
5
5
5

First-year requirements

6

Resource area requirements

7

Internship

7

Senior project

8

Writing requirement
Human ecology essay
Community service
SELF-DIRECTED STUDIES
Independent study
Group study
Residency

9
10
10
10
10
11
12

TUTORIALS

12

ETHICAL RESEARCH REVIEW BOARD

12

REVIEW AND APPEALS

13

ADVISING

13

CAREER SERVICES

13

STUDENT RESPONSIBILITY

14

CLASS ATTENDANCE

14

ACADEMIC INTEGRITY

14

DEGREE PROGRESS

14

CONTRACTS AND SIGNATURES

14

COURSE/FACULTY EVALUATIONS

14

ACCOMODATING STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES

15

RECORDS AND EVALUATIONS

15

TRANSCRIPTS

15

PRIVACY

16

INSTRUCTOR EVALUATIONS

16

GPA

17

STUDENT SELF-EVALUATIONS

17

MIDTERM EVALUATIONS

17

INCOMPLETE WORK

18

ACADEMIC STANDING

18

SATISFACTORY ACADEMIC PROGRESS

18

ACADEMIC PROBATION

18

TRANSFER CREDIT

19

CREDIT BY EXAM OR MILITARY EXPERIENCE

20

GRADUATION AND SENIOR YEAR

20

LEAVE OF ABSENCE

21

MEDICAL LEAVE
ADDITIONAL PROGRAMS

21
21

EDUCATIONAL STUDIES AND TEACHER CERTIFICATION

21

STUDY ABROAD

22

CONSORTIUM AGREEMENTS

22

AFFILIATION AGREEMENTS

23

GRADUATE PROGRAM

23

IMMUNIZATION REQUIREMENT

24

REGISTRATION AND FEES

25

REGISTRATION

25

ADD/DROP

26

WITHDRAWAL

26

AUDITORS

26

NON-DEGREE SEEKING STUDENTS

26

TUITION

26

PAYMENT OF BILLS

27

BILLING ERRORS

27

HOUSING AND DINING

27

STUDENT ACTIVITIES FEE

28

LAB FEES

28

CREDIT BALANCE RETURNS

28

COURSE WITHDRAWALS/FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS

28

FINANCIAL AID AND WORK-STUDY

29

PART II
COA FACULTY MEMBERS 2022–2023
COA STAFF MEMBERS 2022–2023

31
34

PART III
COURSE LISTINGS 2022–2023

37

ARTS AND DESIGN

37

EDUCATIONAL STUDIES

54

ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCES

60

HUMAN ECOLOGY
HUMAN STUDIES
MULTIDISCIPLINARY

81
81
128

INDEX BY COURSE TITLE

135

INDEX BY COURSE NUMBER

145

PART I

HUMAN ECOLOGY: 							
AN EDUCATIONAL APPROACH
Emboldened by human ecology as an educational philosophy, faculty and students at College of the Atlantic
embrace the act of knowing about the world and knowing oneself deeply. One of the touchstones of this
philosophy is independent thinking that results in a diverse array of educational trajectories and
transformational processes.
The radicalism of an education in human ecology is a probing and determined search for the roots of
contemporary social, cultural, political, and environmental issues. By engaging the experimental and pluralistic
heritage of learning in the liberal arts traditions, we seek to inspire theoretically informed and personally
reflective learning.
Exploring human ecology requires the skills and dispositions necessary to live with commitment to a community
that is both local and global. To thrive and contribute to such a complex world, students will become empowered
through the mastery of intellectual and practical skills.
The habits of heart and mind necessary for this challenging education include the willingness to:
•

Be passionate about and dedicated to learning

•

Bring both heart and mind to the tasks of learning and living

•

Live in the questions and to increase tolerance of uncertainty

•

Be playful, open, and creative

•

Act responsibly and with compassion

WHAT YOU SHOULD LEARN AT COA
Creativity: In all endeavors the ability to imagine and construct novel approaches or perspectives, to be
innovative, and to invent. This includes the flexibility to use many different approaches in solving a problem,
and to change direction and modify approach, the originality to produce unique and unusual responses, and the
ability to expand and embellish one’s ideas and projects. This also includes taking intellectual and creative risks
and practicing divergent thinking.
Critical thinking: The ability to not only interpret and evaluate information from multiple sources but also
to induce, deduce, judge, define, order, and prioritize in the interest of individual and collective action. This
includes the ability to recognize one’s self-knowledge and its limits, challenge preconceptions, and to work with
imperfect information.
Community engagement: A deep understanding of oneself and respect for the complex identities of others,
their histories, their cultures, and the ability to lead and collaborate with diverse individuals, organizations, and
communities. This includes the ability to work effectively within diverse cultural and political settings.
Communication: The ability to listen actively and express oneself effectively in spoken, written, and nonverbal
domains.
Integrative thinking: The ability to confront complex situations and respond to them as systemic wholes with
interconnected and interdependent parts.
Interdisciplinarity: The ability to think, research, and communicate within and across disciplines while
recognizing the strengths and limitations of each disciplinary approach.

4

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

INTRODUCTION
College of the Atlantic is a small undergraduate college awarding a Bachelor of Arts and a Master of Philosophy
in human ecology. The college’s mission is to foster interdisciplinary approaches to complex environmental and
social problems and questions in the face of rapid cultural change. The academic program encourages students
to view the world as an interacting whole by bringing together traditional disciplines through the unifying
perspective of human ecology.
A human-ecological perspective can most effectively be developed through an education that:
•

Encourages students to pursue their individual academic interests within the context of a broad education
in the arts, sciences, and humanities

•

Promotes the acquisition and application of knowledge through internships, independent research, and
group study projects

•

Offers a college self-governance system that develops active, responsible citizenship and collaborative
decision-making skills

This academic catalog is intended as a resource for all members of the college community. It is to be used as a
manual for academic policies and procedures and for meeting the college’s goals for education.
All academic requirements, guidelines, and regulations have evolved from lengthy discussions among faculty,
students, and staff. Members of the community are encouraged to use this catalog as a basis for discussion of
any clarification or revision to the policies and procedures of the academic program. Students who wish to see a
policy change should bring their suggestions up through one of the standing committees.

MISSION AND VISION
College of the Atlantic enriches the liberal arts tradition through a distinctive educational philosophy—human
ecology. A human-ecological perspective integrates knowledge from all academic disciplines and from personal
experience to investigate—and ultimately improve—the relationships between human beings and our social and
natural communities. The human-ecological perspective guides all aspects of education, research, activism, and
interactions among the college’s students, faculty, staff, and trustees. The College of the Atlantic community
encourages, prepares, and expects students to gain expertise, breadth, values, and practical experience
necessary to achieve individual fulfillment and to help solve problems that challenge communities everywhere.
The faculty, students, trustees, staff, and alumnx of College of the Atlantic envision a world where people
value creativity, intellectual achievement, and the diversity of nature and human cultures. With respect and
compassion, individuals will construct meaningful lives for themselves, gain appreciation for the relationships
among all forms of life, and safeguard the heritage of future generations.

ACADEMIC PROGRAMS 							
AND POLICIES
DEGREE REQUIREMENTS
The degree of Bachelor of Arts in human ecology is granted upon completion of 36 credits specified below and
three requirements bearing no credit. 18 of the 36 credit units must be earned at COA, and a minimum of six
terms must be spent enrolled full or part time at COA. One of those six terms may be a COA internship, but a
minimum of five must be spent on campus. The normal full-time annual load is nine credits, three in each of the
three ten-week terms. One COA credit unit is the equivalent of 3.3 semester hours; nine COA credits are the
equivalent of 30 semester hours.
Courses that fulfill resource area and other requirements are indicated by resource area codes and noted in the
course descriptions: AD = Arts and Design, ED = Educational Studies, ES = Environmental Sciences, HS = Human
Studies, HY = History, QR = Quantitative Reasoning, WF = Writing-Focused, and W = Writing. Courses that fulfill
degree requirements must earn a grade of C or higher.
COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

5

First-year requirements
•

HE: Human Ecology Core Course

•

W/WF: One writing class, a college
seminar, or two writing-focused courses
in the first year of attendance

•

HY: One history course within the first
two years of attendance

•

QR: One quantitative reasoning course
within the first two years of attendance

SENIOR PROJECT
RESIDENCIES
INTERNSHIPS
HUMAN ECOLOGY ESSAY
TIER 3: ADVANCED STUDIES

INDEPENDENT STUDY

Resource area requirements
•

GROUP STUDIES

AD: two courses (taught by different COA
faculty, one must be a studio course)

•

ES: two courses (taught by different COA
faculty)

•

HS: two courses (taught by different COA
faculty)

TUTORIALS
CONTINUED DEVELOPMENT OF
INDIVIDUAL ACADEMIC INTERESTS

TIER 2: INTERMEDIATE COURSES AND
SELF-DIRECTED STUDY

Internship
•
•

Not for credit: eight weeks, full time
For credit: full-time enrollment, one term,
11 weeks, three credits

Both options require a proposal and approval
by the internship committee prior to starting.
The internship, whether for credit or not,
must be followed by at least one term of
enrollment on campus.

HUMAN ECOLOGY CORE COURSE
TWO COURSES FROM EACH RESOURCE AREA
(ARTS & DESIGN, ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCES,
HUMAN STUDIES)

TIER 1: INTRODUCTORY, HUMAN ECOLOGY, AND
FOUNDATIONAL COURSES

Senior project
Three credits, either in a single term or split over multiple terms
Additional non-course requirements
•

Human ecology essay

•

Community service

•

Writing portfolio

Components of the curriculum
Small classes are the foundation of COA’s curriculum. With a faculty-to-student ratio of 1:10, individualized
attention and a seminar format are the classroom norm. Average class size is 12.5. A normal, full-time
student load is three courses per term; a normal, full-time faculty teaching load is five courses over three
terms. Students design their own programs of study, with a few distribution requirements.

FIRST-YEAR REQUIREMENTS
The Human Ecology Core Course (HE) is a requirement for all first-year students. Additional requirements
include one Writing (W) course or two Writing-Focused (WF) courses which should be taken in the first year,
as well as one History (HY) course and one Quantitative Reasoning (QR) course which should be taken in the
first two years of attendance. Please refer to the writing requirement section for more information. These
requirements apply to all first-time, first-year students and transfer students entering with less than the
equivalent of nine COA credits, and are waived for transfer students entering with nine or more COA credits.

6

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

RESOURCE AREA REQUIREMENTS
The curriculum is organized into three multidisciplinary resource areas: arts and design (AD), environmental
sciences (ES), and human studies (HS). A required distribution of two courses from each of the resource
areas helps a student become familiar with the methodology and perspective of each and incorporate these
perspectives into their own work. A student must take a minimum of two courses in each resource area, each
from a different COA faculty member. One of the arts and design courses must be a studio class, listed as ADS.
Amongst academic disciplines, studio art is the making of art contrasted to the study of art history and theory.
The resource area distribution enables a student to gain a broad foundational understanding of approaches
used in each resource area of the curriculum; courses satisfying the distribution requirement should be selected
in consultation with academic advisors. A student combines course work from all three resource areas to design
programs of study which are interdisciplinary and individualized.
The following cannot be used to satisfy the resource area requirements: independent studies, practica, tutorials
(except for some music tutorials), group studies, or MD courses. While MD courses, which are interdisciplinary by
design, have validity and purpose, they are distinctly not appropriate for the distribution requirement.
Transfer credits from other institutions may be used to fulfill resource area requirements. However, only one
AD, HS, or ES may be used in this manner. Approval of courses to fulfill resource area requirements from other
institutions is handled by the registrar in consultation with representative faculty and advisors; the student
must provide the catalog descriptions of the courses to be used for this purpose. AP and IB credits may not be
used to satisfy resource area requirements.

INTERNSHIP
An internship is an academic degree requirement for undergraduates. Internships may be site-based or remote
supervised work experiences in a field compatible with a student’s academic and/or career interest. The goals
of the internship program are for students to gain work experience and make professional connections off
campus. Internships are encouraged with professionals that students are not already familiar with. Students
are encouraged to meet with their advisor and the director of the internship program as they begin planning for
their internship. Internships allow students to apply their knowledge and skills to the job market, develop new
skills, clarify future goals, and establish important career contacts.
Internships offer students opportunities to engage in identifying and seeking employment, developing
resumes and support materials, interviewing successfully, and making informed decisions. Returning to a
former employer or worksite, or working with relatives is not an option. Interns are encouraged to take part
in onboarding, training, meetings, and workshops held at the worksite or virtually. First-year students may
complete an internship during the summer between their first and second year of college. Transfer students
should consider meeting with the internship program director as soon as they arrive on campus. A student must
be in good academic standing and have no outstanding account balances or coursework extensions prior to
enrolling for an internship.
In order to integrate the internship with later academic experiences, an internship cannot take place during the
final term of enrollment. If you are graduating in 2023, please check in with the internship program director as
soon as possible regarding your internship intentions. A student must spend at least one term enrolled (for at
least one credit) following the internship and prior to graduation. The following term may be the senior project.
The internship office maintains an active file of organizations, alumnx mentors, and job contacts to help
students find internships that are appropriate to their career needs and interests. The director is available to
help students take advantage of the resources of the office, including resume and cover letter writing, portfolio
development, seeking and contacting appropriate employers, and support during internships. Faculty advisors
also have contacts that may produce internships in their academic fields.
Students may elect to do an internship for credit or not for credit. The successful completion of either an
eleven-week, full-time (440 hours total during an academic term) credit internship or an eight-week, full-time
(320 hours total during the summer) non-credit internship satisfies the degree requirement. After accepting
an internship, the student develops a proposal which includes their resume, a letter of commitment/email
from the internship sponsor/supervisor, and health and safety forms; the documents are then submitted to the
internship committee for review. Once approved students are registered for the internship. After the completion
of the internship, students must submit an internship report and an evaluation from their sponsor/supervisor.
Returned interns meet with the internship committee to review their reports together. The internship director
compiles a written evaluation for the student’s transcript which includes excerpts from the proposal, report, and

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

7

the sponsor’s evaluation. All internship documentation is filed in the internship office.
Current guidelines for writing proposals, resumes, and reports are available in the internship office and on the
college’s website.
In certain instances students may complete up to two three-credit internships or several summer non-credit
internships. Students wishing to take a second for-credit internship must have support from their advisors, a
strong rationale for the need of a second internship, and an approved proposal. Student teaching may be used
to fulfill the internship requirement. Students choosing this option must meet the standards set for both the
student teaching practicum and the internship requirement.

SENIOR PROJECT
The senior project is a three-credit, independent effort required for the human ecology degree. It is a
significant intellectual endeavor, experiment, research project, or original work which is intended to advance
understanding in a particular academic area and bring together the skills and knowledge acquired during the
student’s college career. It is a major work at an advanced level, occupying at least one term, earning three
credits. The three credits of a senior project may be spread over two or more terms if the research requires
more than 10 weeks or if the student wishes to combine the senior project with course work in their final terms.
Many approved senior projects take place primarily off campus.
With the exception of the spring term prior to graduation, senior project enrollment may be combined with
course enrollment even if the total load is four credits. If a student wishes to conduct a senior project, in whole
or in part, in the spring term and enroll for one or more classes, registering for more than three credits total,
they must gain approval through an appeal to the Review and Appeals Committee prior to the end of the add/
drop period for the spring term.
Once a student registers for their senior project, they will have one academic year (three consecutive terms) to
complete it, barring extensions. If at the end of that time period the project is not completed the student will be
withdrawn from the institution. When a student re-enrolls to complete their project, they must reapply through
the office of admission and pay all applicable admission fees, as well as a one-time senior project registration
fee. The project must be completed by the end of the term. If the student does not complete the project in the
allotted time, the next enrollment will be at the full rate of three credits with a new proposal required and with
one academic year to complete the project.
A COA faculty member or a non-COA expert may serve as the senior project director. This person is responsible
for the final evaluation and may or may not be the faculty member on a student’s permanent advising team. In
addition, resource persons outside the college may be used. Non-COA project directors are eligible for a $400
honorarium.
The review and appeals committee posts deadlines for submission of senior project proposals; the deadlines are
listed on the back cover of this catalog and online. Students wishing to register for senior project credits must
obtain a signature from the chair of the review and appeals committee on their registration form. In order to
obtain a signature from the chair of Review and Appeals, a student must have submitted a complete proposal to
the committee for review.
Proposals should be readable by the general community and free of jargon. The relevance of the project within
the context of a COA education should be clear. A completed proposal should be submitted to the review and
appeals committee before registering for senior project credits. Project proposal cover sheets are available in
the registrar’s office and online with a checklist of required elements included.
The following elements must be included in a senior project proposal:
•

Statements describing purpose, methodology, schedule for completion, criteria for evaluation, manner of
final presentation, and the role of the project director

•

Detailed description of the way in which this project is a culmination of the student’s work at COA, including
academic background, career goals, and qualifications to do this work

•

Documentation of how the student will achieve 450 academically engaged hours

•

Bibliography and/or other references which place the work in a theoretical context, demonstrating what will
be new learning or original synthesis

•

A cover sheet bearing signatures of the permanent advising team members and the project director,
including the preliminary project title

8

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

Note: Senior projects without completed and approved proposals cannot receive credit, which may result in a
student not being able to graduate.
The completed senior project must be submitted to the COA archivist no later than the end of the ninth week
of the spring term. Failure to meet this deadline will jeopardize the student’s ability to graduate in June. The
student is responsible for submitting their project in a format approved by the COA archivist, following the
guidelines posted on the registrar’s webpage. This includes a brief abstract (200–400 words, single spaced)
describing the project. The project is cataloged by the COA Thorndike Library and added to its permanent
collection of senior projects for reference by future students.
Students must also submit a description and self-evaluation electronically to the registrar’s office; the project
director will submit an evaluation. Letter grades are not given for senior projects.

WRITING REQUIREMENT
There are two components to the writing requirement:
1.

Writing course: This is one of the first-year requirements for all students entering with fewer than nine
COA credits. Students must take either one writing class, a college seminar, or two writing-focused classes
within their first year at COA. Writing courses are designated W in the course description; writing-focused
classes are designated WF and classes with a writing-focused option are designated WFO. Students who
have scored a four or higher on the AP English exam or a six or higher on the IB English A HL exam, or who
have taken a college-level writing course, may be exempted from this requirement; determination for an
exemption is made by the writing program director.   

2.

Writing portfolio: The goal of the second phase of the writing requirement is to ensure that all students
write at an advanced collegiate level. Students entering as first-year students or transfer students with
fewer than nine credits must submit a writing portfolio once they have completed 18 COA credits. Transfer
students with nine or more credits are required to submit a portfolio by the end of their third term of
residence. Failure to meet this requirement may result in the student not being allowed to register for the
following term.

The portfolio should be submitted through the student portal. This portfolio, which is reviewed by a member of
the team of faculty reviewers, should include three essays, written for courses, that explain a concept or issue:
•

One must demonstrate that you can analyze an issue or argue a position

•

One (either expository or argumentative) must be five or more pages

•

One must demonstrate that you can use and document sources appropriately

These essays are reviewed to ensure that students meet the criteria specified in the writing rubric. These
criteria include the ability to:
•

Write coherently

•

Organize a paper so that the writing moves logically from sentence to paragraph to whole paper

•

Write sentences that do not interfere with the author’s intent or meaning and use sources consistently and
appropriately

When students demonstrate that they can clearly explain and/or address an issue and formulate and support
a coherent and logical argument without significant mechanical or grammatical errors, they will have met the
second component of the writing requirement.
Students whose writing is flawed by minor mechanical errors or minor errors in documentation will be asked to
work with a writing tutor until they have mastered the problem.
Students with more serious writing issues will meet with their advisor and the faculty reviewer and/or
writing program director to collaboratively develop a plan to improve their writing. The development and
implementation of the plan should not only be supportive but should allow the student to achieve a higher level
of writing competency. The written contract will not only articulate the specific goals that must be met, but also
may include, but not be limited to, taking other writing or writing-focused courses, working on writing in other
courses, and working on a regular basis in the writing center.

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

9

HUMAN ECOLOGY ESSAY
The human ecology essay is a work of exposition, argumentation, extended description, or narration and should
be approximately 2,000 words long. By choosing and developing a subject of personal or social significance,
the student explores their perspective on human ecology. The human ecology essay is not expected to be a
paper done for a course, although it can evolve from such a paper or be produced in a writing class. The human
ecology essay must be clear, concise, and coherent. In some cases a student may choose to do a nonverbal
essay, or write a piece of fiction or poetry. If this is the case, the student must submit an additional two- to fourpage essay explaining how the project reflects their notion of human ecology.
The student’s advisor and one additional faculty member will serve as readers for the human ecology essay.
When the student turns in their first draft of the essay, they must specify the names of their two readers to the
faculty assistant along with the draft. Both readers must be continuing faculty members. Both the readers must
approve the essay in order for the essay to be considered approved. Usually a student’s essay goes through
several drafts and takes three to six weeks to be approved. It is the student’s responsibility to submit drafts to
both readers and find out their readers’ schedules for commentary no later than six weeks before the deadline
for final approval (approximately the first of January). Students are strongly encouraged to work with the
Writing Center on their essays; their readers may require them to do so.
Students are strongly encouraged to begin work on their human ecology essay during the second half of their
junior year. The initial draft is due toward the beginning of the fall term of the student’s senior year, and the
final draft is due in mid-February. Both the initial draft and the final draft must be submitted to the faculty
assistant and the two readers by the appropriate deadlines. The student’s advisor oversees the human ecology
essay process and ensures that deadlines are met.
Students who fail to meet human ecology essay deadlines will jeopardize their ability to graduate or stand in
June. Essays that are submitted after the deadline will not be eligible for inclusion in the human ecology essay
publication.

COMMUNITY SERVICE
All students at COA are required to complete 40 hours of community service prior to their last term of
enrollment. The college believes that community service provides students with valuable experience as well
as personal and educational opportunities that complement a student’s studies in human ecology. A student
can satisfy the community service requirement through on-campus or off-campus volunteer work. On-campus
service examples include committee membership, planning campus-wide activities such as Earth Day, or
volunteering at Beech Hill Farm. Off-campus service includes activities that strengthen the college’s ties to the
local community such as tutoring math in an after-school program, volunteering at a library on the island, or
a conservation project in the park. A combination of on-campus and off-campus experiences is encouraged.
Community service must be on a volunteer basis (not for pay or for course credit) and consist of a minimum
of 40 hours in total. Most students have an excess of community-oriented work and ultimately need to decide
which experiences to use to fulfill the requirement. The internships and career services director is responsible
for assessing the adequacy of the student’s service. A one-page form with a description of the activity, length
of involvement, and reflections must be completed and returned to the internship office by the end of the winter
term prior to graduation. The required form is available on the college’s website. In addition, the office has
resources for on- and off-campus community service opportunities.

SELF-DIRECTED STUDIES
INDEPENDENT STUDY
An independent study provides an opportunity for the student to design their own course. It is intended to be
student-initiated and carried out under the supervision of faculty or community sponsors. An independent study
is appropriate for advanced or specially focused work not offered in the regular course curriculum, for study in
fields not offered by the college, or study requiring work off campus.
First-year students are not allowed to undertake an independent study. No more than two independent studies
are permitted within one academic year (they cannot be banked). Transfer students with nine or more COA
credits are permitted to take two independent studies per year starting from the first year they enroll at
COA. Every independent study must have a project director. An on-campus faculty sponsor is required if the
independent study project director is an off-campus resource. In the event that the off-campus project director
10

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

fails to generate a grade and written evaluation, the on-campus sponsor is responsible for providing this
information.
Students must be in good academic standing with no prior incomplete coursework. An independent study is
considered incomplete until the proposal has been completed and the student’s self evaluation and description
of the study have been submitted to the registrar, along with the director’s grade and written evaluation.
Proposals must document 150 academically engaged hours; this can include such activities as meetings with
the director, reading, research, studio work, laboratory time, writing, etc. Proposals need to include educational
goals, anticipated learning resources, assessment criteria, and an approximate timetable of events. An
honorarium is available to off-campus project directors pending receipt of grade and evaluation of student’s
work. A cover sheet must be submitted with the proposal, and requires the following signatures:
•

Student

•

Study director—COA faculty, staff or non-COA expert (non-COA directors must submit credentials specific
to the independent study, for instance a CV or resume, for review by the registrar)

•

Faculty sponsor (required when the director is not a member of the COA faculty)

•

Advisor

•

Academic probation officer

GROUP STUDY
The group study is a student-initiated, one-term project which provides an opportunity for collective pursuit of
specific academic problems, topics, or issues which are not offered in the regular curriculum. Key factors in the
success of any student-designed study at COA are planning, goal setting, and evaluation. The content of group
studies ranges widely. Some groups work on hands-on projects which have tangible products. Some groups are
more seminar-like, with the objective being the sharing of information among members. Group studies are taken
for credit/no credit only. First-year students and those on academic probation or with outstanding work (i.e.
extensions) are not eligible. The group study administrator is required to submit an evaluation of each student
to the registrar within three weeks from the end of the term. Participants decide how these evaluations will be
done.
The requirement that students describe these plans clearly in a proposal is intentional. In addition to review
of the students’ planning, the provost and the academic probation officer review the student’s proposal for its
content and relationship to the rest of the curriculum, as well as academic eligibility. A group study must be
approved prior to the registration period for the term when it will be done; deadlines for submission of proposals
are published in the back of this catalog and online.
For a group study to be established the following requirements must be met:
•

A minimum of five and maximum of eight active participants

•

At least three of the five should share responsibility for the design of the group study and the preparation
of the proposal

The proposal should:
•

Contain a clear description of the educational goals and methods of the study

•

Identify the tangible products

•

Include a syllabus based upon a minimum of three hours of regularly scheduled meetings per week and a
total of 150 academically engaged hours

•

Outline criteria for evaluation, being clear about what constitutes participation worthy of credit

•

Identify a faculty sponsor and any additional resource persons

•

Identify a student administrator

•

Contain an itemized budget. Budget support is available from the college for expenditures such as travel
and supplies necessary to the learning activity. The maximum award is $300.

Approval procedure:
Proposals must be submitted to the provost by the published deadline (Friday of week three of the term prior to
COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

11

registration) with an itemized budget that includes expenses which are essential for the learning to take place.
The group study proposal cover sheet (available on the COA registrar’s web page) must accompany all proposals
and have all required signatures.
At midterm, representatives of the group are required to make a progress report to the provost.
Students may not take two group studies in the same term or more than two per academic year.

RESIDENCY
A residency is a three-credit, term-long educational experience designed by an advanced student. In order to do
a residency students must have earned at least 18 COA credits and be in good academic standing. A maximum
of two residencies may be used toward graduation requirements. Residencies offer students the opportunity to
put together their own cohesive program of study in order to explore areas which may not be provided in either
the content or structure of the regular academic curriculum.
Students should have a developed interest in an area that cannot be satisfied by the regular curriculum and
have the motivation, work habits, and creativity necessary to pursue this interest in an academically responsible
manner. Students must have an excellent academic record and be in good standing to participate in a residency.
Students have used the residency term to explore topics as diverse as: women’s health issues; the history
of Western thought; physical, cultural, and intellectual approaches to dance; issues in psychology and the
treatment of mental illness. A recent residency used quilting as a theme to explore color theory, organic and
chemical fabric dyeing, computer-aided design, and three quilting cultures. A residency allows a student to learn
first hand the educational value inherent in interdisciplinary study.
A COA faculty member must be the primary director of a residency and have scheduled contact with the student
throughout the term. This may be done by office visits (if the residency is local or on campus), or remotely by
phone, email, or internet. Any outside director to the project will assist the primary director in completing final
evaluations. Residencies are taken for credit/no credit only. While students are encouraged to do one residency
only, a maximum of two can be allowed.
Students must submit a proposal to do a residency. The residency application form may be downloaded from
the registrar’s page online or picked up at the registrar’s office. The application for the residency must be
submitted to the review and appeals committee by the registration deadline for the term in which it is to occur
(See schedule of deadlines in the back of this catalog and online). Late residency applications will NOT be
considered. Students are advised to register for alternate classes in the event that their residency application
is not approved. All residency applications will be approved or rejected by the review and appeals committee
before the end of the term prior to when the residency is to occur.

TUTORIALS
Tutorials are faculty-initiated studies for one to five students which cover specialized material not available
within the regular curriculum. They differ from independent studies and group studies in that faculty members,
not students, are responsible for design and implementation. Tutorials cannot be used to fulfill resource area
requirements (with the exception of some music tutorials).

ETHICAL RESEARCH REVIEW BOARD
Research on human subjects is an integral part of human ecology at College of the Atlantic. The college’s policy
on human subject research is intended to foster an environment that supports and encourages such research.
In addition, the policy establishes mechanisms to assist those wishing to undertake human subject research.
College of the Atlantic has in place a set of procedures concerning research involving human subjects to
ensure the physical and psychological safety of participants and to ensure that researchers follow appropriate
ethical standards and comply with federal laws protecting research subjects. Research that will be reviewed
includes faculty research, senior projects, and graduate theses. In addition, a limited set of classroom projects,
residencies, and independent studies may also require review, especially if they are disseminated publicly.
An Ethical Research Review Board (ERRB) will be appointed by the provost at the beginning of each academic
year. The ERRB is charged with implementing this policy in a manner appropriate to the interdisciplinary
nature of COA and consistent with federal law. The ERRB will provide researchers with materials and tools to
determine if their project(s) fall under the category of human subject research. The ERRB will assist researchers
12

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

wishing to undertake research on human subjects to develop strategies for meeting ethical and legal standards
appropriate to their research.
Students and faculty must seek approval for their research from the ERRB when they initially propose their
work. Student projects which do not gain approval may not be granted college credit or count as fulfilling
graduation requirements. The application for approval, in the form of an ethical research review form and
accompanying narrative, will be forwarded for review and approval to the chair of the ERRB who will convene
to review proposals on a rolling basis. Researchers may appeal the ERRB’s decision to the provost or their
designee. The provost’s decision is final.
For further information, a full statement of the college’s policy, and details on the process of application and
review, contact the ERRB chair.

REVIEW AND APPEALS
The review and appeals committee, a subcommittee of Academic Affairs, considers student proposals for senior
projects and residencies, along with petitions for exemption from requirements and unusual requests for credit.
This subcommittee also receives and reviews appeals for reconsideration of any other decisions regarding a
student’s academic work, and assesses and evaluates fees related to the academic program.

ADVISING
Incoming students are assigned an academic advisor when they first arrive on campus. The working relationship
between the student and their advisor is very important because of the self-directed nature of study at the
college. The freedom of students to plan individual programs carries with it the responsibility to develop
coherent courses of study. The academic advisor serves as the primary resource for this planning process. The
advising relationship is critical to the success of students’ academic programs and students are encouraged
to change advisors as their academic interests and needs evolve. The best advisors are those who share
intellectual and educational interests with their student advisees. It is hoped that through class contact and
campus events, students will develop collegiality with several faculty or staff. It is from these connections
that students can build advising relationships with faculty who can support their educational and career
pursuits. The advisors serve as both professional mentors and guides as students work their way through
their college experience. Advising meetings may include discussing resource area requirements, considering
further educational or career planning, or simply serving as a sounding board for a student’s academic and
personal concerns. Students are highly encouraged to meet with their advisors regularly. Students may also
change advisors using the change of advisor form link on the college’s website. As there is an atmosphere of
collaboration at College of the Atlantic, students are encouraged to seek connections with other faculty, staff,
and students to broaden their advising experience. For questions or further information on the advising system,
please contact the provost or advising team members.

CAREER SERVICES
The office of internships and career services reflects the college’s mission by guiding students to be empowered
through the mastery of intellectual and practical skill development. Students enrolled at the college have
selected human ecology as the lens through which they explore the world by recognizing its problems,
studying the issues, and being motivated to make the world a better place. Career guidance is an integral part
of a student’s experience at COA. Students are encouraged to contact the director early in their educational
trajectory. Career development services for students and alumnx include:
•

Labor market information

•

Resume and cover letter guidance

•

Alumnx mentors, friends of the college, referrals

•

One-on-one career coaching (in person, by phone, or by Zoom)

•

Searchable employment databases, mock interviews

•

Employment guides

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

13

Graduate school information, scholarships and fellowships, and post-graduation relocation strategies

STUDENT RESPONSIBILITY

College of the Atlantic’s advising system is set up to provide students with help and guidance in a number of
areas. However, a student’s education is ultimately their responsibility. In particular, it is the responsibility of all
COA students to adhere to the requirements and deadlines published in the course catalog and other college
materials.

CLASS ATTENDANCE
Students are expected to attend the first class meeting for any course in which they are enrolled. Students
who do not attend on the first day of the class may be dropped from the course at the sole discretion of
the instructor. Students may also be dropped if they enroll for a course without having met the published
prerequisites. Students do not need the instructor’s signature to drop a class during the add/drop period.
However, students are asked to inform the instructor of their decision to drop, so that their seat in the class
may be given to other students. College of the Atlantic does not have a college-wide policy concerning class
attendance. However, individual faculty members may—and usually do—set attendance expectations for their
classes. In the event that a class is missed, the responsibility for making up any missed work lies with the
student, in negotiation with the faculty member.

ACADEMIC INTEGRITY
By enrolling in an academic institution, a student is subscribing to common standards of academic honesty. Any
cheating, plagiarism, falsifying or fabricating of data is a breach of such standards. A student must make it their
responsibility to not use words or works of others without proper acknowledgment. Plagiarism is unacceptable
and evidence of such activity is reported to the provost or their designee. Two violations of academic integrity
are grounds for dismissal from the college. Students should request in-class discussions of such questions when
complex issues of ethical scholarship arise.

DEGREE PROGRESS
It is the student’s responsibility to be aware of their status as a degree candidate, and to utilize their advisor to
certify progress for graduation. To help make this certification clearer, students should use their student portal
to follow their academic progress.

CONTRACTS AND SIGNATURES
When a student submits their course registration, they have made a commitment to those courses or other
credit units. The student will owe tuition to match that registration, and the student’s transcript will list the
titles of those courses, whether or not credit is earned. Add/drop forms must be filed by the deadlines set for
each term in order to make changes to course registration. All financial obligations must be cleared (or loan
payments made current) with the college before a student may register, receive a diploma, or have a transcript
sent. Lost library books are also considered financial obligations to the college.

COURSE/FACULTY EVALUATIONS
At the end of a course, the personnel and academic affairs committees require course/faculty evaluations from
each student enrolled. Course evaluation forms ask questions regarding course organization, idea synthesis and
clarity, class-teacher rapport, importance of the course to the COA curriculum, and recommendations for future
classes. These forms are extremely important in evaluating teacher performance. They provide a written history
of faculty work critical to accurate assessment of teaching success.
Course evaluation forms are available either in paper format or online through the student portal by choice
of the instructor. Paper forms should be submitted to the office of academic and administrative services.
All evaluations are held until faculty evaluations of students are in, then they are passed to the personnel

14

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

committee and the provost for use in continuing reviews of faculty work and in periodic reviews for contract
renewal. Faculty members are expected to read course evaluations, but do not have access to them before
writing evaluations of students.

ACCOMODATING STUDENTS 				
WITH DISABILITIES
To ensure that programs, activities and services are accessible to all matriculating students, College of the
Atlantic is committed to providing reasonable accommodations for students with documented disabilities.
Documented disabilities may include, but are not limited to: a learning disability; attention deficit disorder; a
visual, auditory, or mobility impairment; a physical or mental health illness.
COA’s policies and practices comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act, Section 504 of the Rehabilitation
Act, and the state and local requirements regarding students with disabilities. Under these laws, no qualified
individual with a disability shall be denied access to or participation in services, programs, and activities of
College of the Atlantic.
In compliance with federal and state regulations, reasonable accommodations are provided to qualified
students with disabilities. A reasonable accommodation is one that is consistent with the academic standards
of the college and does not fundamentally alter the nature of the course or program. COA works directly and
individually with students throughout the accommodation process. Final authority for determining the most
reasonable and effective accommodation rests with the college and is based on the nature of the course or
program and the individual student’s disability-related need(s). A qualified individual is a person who, with or
without reasonable accommodations, can perform the essential functions of a program or course requirements.
The essential requirements of an academic course or program need not be modified to accommodate an
individual with a disability.
COA’s designated disability support services are located within the office of student life in Deering Commons.
From this office students needing accommodation will be directed to academic, programmatic, or campus
mobility specialists for assistance. Students are encouraged to meet with a disability support services
professional to develop a plan for their academic accommodations. A request for accommodation is deemed
reasonable if it is based on documented individual needs and does not compromise essential requirements of a
course or program, does not pose a threat to personal or public safety, and does not impose undue financial or
administrative burden.
Students seeking reasonable accommodations must provide current documentation of the disability either
before or at the time they request accommodations. It is the responsibility of the student to work with
appropriate staff or faculty each term to ensure that appropriate accommodations are put in place at the start
of the term. COA does not provide assessment services for documentation of learning differences—all testing is
done by outside evaluators at the student’s expense.

RECORDS AND EVALUATIONS
Each unit of work completed at College of the Atlantic has a three-part evaluation consisting of a course
description, instructor evaluation, and a student self-evaluation. Evaluations serve a dual purpose; they form an
ongoing portfolio and permanent record for use by the student and advisors, and they comprise the narrative
transcript that may be read in conjunction with applications to other schools and future employment. As a
summary and synthesis of work over a period of years, the transcript is an effective way to show how courses
and projects mesh into a coherent education of the student’s own design.

TRANSCRIPTS
An official College of the Atlantic transcript can include either a single page that lists all of the course titles,
credits attempted/earned, or a full transcript that also includes narrative evaluations and self-evaluations.
COA has partnered with Parchment to deliver secure official transcripts either electronically or in paper format.
COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

15

All transcripts must be ordered online at coa.edu/transcripts, even those that will be picked up in the registrar’s
office. Processing time is 2-5 business days. Current students can print unofficial transcripts directly from their
student portal.
Transcripts will not be released if the student has overdue bills in the business office and/or library. Students
have access to their own files in the registrar’s office during regular office hours. In keeping with policies under
the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (below), the college requires the student’s release, in writing,
before opening educational records to third parties.

PRIVACY
The college’s policies, consistent with the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974 (FERPA), are as
follows:
This act is a federal law, which provides that academic institutions will maintain the confidentiality of student
education records.
College of the Atlantic accords all the rights under the law to students who are declared independent. No one
outside the college shall have access to nor will the institution disclose any information from students’ records
without the written consent of students, except to persons or organizations providing student financial aid, to
accrediting agencies carrying out their accreditation function, to persons in compliance with a judicial order,
and to persons in an emergency in order to protect the health or safety of students or other persons. All these
exceptions are permitted under the act.
College of the Atlantic also requests, beyond the requirements of law, that all students, whether or not
declared independent, give their written consent in the sending of evaluations and transcripts to parents and to
officials of other institutions in which students seek to enroll. Within the COA community, only those members,
individually or collectively, acting in the students’ educational interest are allowed access to student educational
records. These include personnel in the financial aid, business, admission, student life, internship, and registrar’s
offices, provosts, advisors, and faculty, within the limitations of their need to know.
At its discretion, the college may provide directory information in accordance with the provisions of the act
to include: student name, address (campus, email), phone number, major field of study, dates of attendance,
degrees and awards received, the most recent previous educational institution attended, and participation
in officially recognized activities and sports. Students may withhold directory information by notifying the
registrar in writing within two weeks after the first day of an academic term. Requests for nondisclosure will be
honored until the registrar is notified otherwise.
The law provides students with the right to inspect and review information contained in their education records,
to challenge the contents of their records, to have a hearing if the outcome of the challenge is unsatisfactory,
and to submit explanatory statements for inclusion in their files if they feel the decisions of the hearing panels
are unacceptable. COA students have unrestricted access to their own records; they may have copies made of
their records at their own expense, with certain exceptions (in cases of overdue bills in the business office and/
or library).
Education records do not include employment records, alumnx records, student health records, or records
of instructional, administrative, and other personnel which are the sole possession of the maker and are
not accessible or revealed to any individual. Health records, however, may be reviewed by physicians of the
student’s choosing.
Students who believe that their education records contain information that is inaccurate or misleading, or
otherwise in violation of their privacy or other rights, may discuss their problems informally with the registrar.
If the decisions are in agreement with the student’s request, the appropriate records will be amended. If not,
students will be informed by the registrar of their right to a formal hearing. Student requests for a formal
hearing must be made to the Review and Appeals Committee, which will inform students of the date, place,
and time of the hearing. Students who believe that their rights have been abridged may file complaints with
The Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act Office (FERPA), Department of Health, Education, and Welfare,
Washington, D.C. 20201, concerning the alleged failures of the college to comply with the act.

INSTRUCTOR EVALUATIONS
The first part of an evaluation is written by the instructor (or by group study members, or, for an independent
study, by the student) and is an objective description of the course work and criteria used for evaluation. The
16

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

second part is also written by the instructor and addresses the student’s performance in light of the stated
criteria. The narrative evaluation is an opportunity for the instructor to discuss a student’s work in a way that
cannot be communicated through a letter grade alone.
Student grade options are credit/no credit or letter grades. For some courses (residencies, internships, and
senior projects), letter grades are not an option; the instructor may also choose to opt only for credit/no credit.
Request for a credit/no credit grade must be made in writing on the add/drop form no later than the add/
drop deadline. Grade options may not be changed retroactively. The grading option to be selected should be
discussed thoroughly with advisors and faculty.
The COA faculty follow the following grading definitions:
For determining credit/no credit the following criteria are used.
CREDIT: Satisfactory completion of the requirements as stated in the course description. The quality of
the work may range from an excellent to an average comprehension of course material. Equivalent to C or
above in letter grade system.
NO CREDIT: Failure to complete the requirements as stated in the course description or to demonstrate
satisfactory comprehension of the course material. A final status of No Credit means that work was not
sufficient for credit and/or that it is too late for credit to be considered.
For letter grades the following criteria are used.
A

EXCELLENT: outstanding or superior insight extending beyond the normal requirements for the 		
course; exceeding expectations; completion of all required work

B

GOOD: conversant in all course topics; completion of all course work

C

SATISFACTORY: comprehension of the material and completion of basic requirements

D

Completion of minimal requirements and demonstration of minimal competence, academic 			
credit is awarded

F

Failure to complete minimal requirements or to demonstrate comprehension of key course 			
topics, recorded as No Credit for those not opting for letter grades

GPA
COA does not provide/calculate GPAs for its students. However, upon special request, the registrar will calculate
a GPA based only on courses for which the student received letter grades, and include it in a separate letter that
also states the number of courses from which the GPA is calculated.

STUDENT SELF-EVALUATIONS
The third part of the evaluation is the student’s self-evaluation. While optional for most courses, it is required
for independent studies, residencies, and senior projects. The self-evaluation is an important component of
the narrative transcript. It provides an opportunity to record the student’s assessment of the progress of their
education and provides valuable insights to the reader about the student’s performance in classes beyond what
is conveyed by a letter grade. Instructions for submitting self-evaluations are distributed by the registrar at the
end of each term and are available on the student portal. Self-evaluations may be submitted for up to two weeks
following the end of the term and are posted after faculty have submitted their grades and evaluations. Late
self-evaluations are not accepted since they must remain independent of faculty evaluations.

MIDTERM EVALUATIONS
An in-class, midterm evaluation is done in every course and although this does not become part of a student’s
permanent academic record, it is an important means of student-teacher evaluation. Ideally, the midterm
evaluation is a class-wide discussion of the students’ performances, class expectations, and suggested
enhancements for the remainder of the term. If students are under-performing at this point in the term their
academic advisor and the provost or their designee are notified.

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

17

INCOMPLETE WORK
Completing assigned work for classes in a timely manner is a necessary part of education just as effective time
management is a necessary skill in the world beyond COA. If a student encounters difficulty completing work
by the specified deadline, they should speak with their instructor and/or advisor to seek assistance. Similarly, if
an instructor finds that a student repeatedly turns assignments in late or not at all, they should speak with the
student to determine how to help the student complete work necessary for learning and academic credit. An
incomplete grade will automatically turn to an F three weeks into the subsequent term unless proper paperwork
is filed with the registrar.
If a student has not completed all of the work necessary to meet the requirements of a course by the end of
the term, the student must either complete a written extension request (form available in registrar’s office
and online) or be evaluated on the merit of work completed. A student who falls behind in their work should
speak to the instructor(s) as soon as possible to determine if an extension may be approved. It is the student’s
responsibility to request an extension and submit the form.
When the faculty member receives a completed extension form, they may either deny the request and evaluate
the student on the merit of work completed, or grant an extension up to the end of the fourth week of the
following term. The extension may be lengthened beyond the end of the fourth week at the faculty member’s
and academic probation officer’s discretion. Any extenuating circumstances requiring extensions beyond this
deadline should be determined jointly by the student, faculty member, and academic probation officer since
such extensions impact grading, financial aid, and billing.
If by the contracted extension deadline the work still is not complete and there is no further extension, the
faculty member will evaluate the student based on work completed to date. If the faculty member does not
assign a grade or credit, the extension will revert to a failing grade or no credit. Students must file signed
extension contracts with the registrar’s office within three weeks from the end of the term.

ACADEMIC STANDING
A COA student’s progress toward the degree is measured in credit units; to be considered in good standing
a student must be earning credits in satisfactory proportion to the number attempted and must not be on
academic probation.
Each COA course is worth one credit, though amounts of commitment and effort required may vary. With
permission of an advisor, students other than first-term registrants may register for a maximum of four credits
in a term.

SATISFACTORY ACADEMIC PROGRESS
Normal or satisfactory progress toward the degree is made through the equivalent of four full-time years
of study, or nine COA credits per year. The student must be aware of this definition of full time for various
purposes of eligibility for financial aid and student loans, especially from sources such as VA benefits; fulltime enrollment is three credits per term and nine per year. The college recognizes many good reasons for
graduation timetables that differ from a traditional four-year program; it is a student’s responsibility to discuss
their program with advisors and to be aware of financial aid implications.
Financial aid implications include the potential loss of all aid if the student does not maintain satisfactory
academic progress (SAP). Generally, this means the student must maintain the equivalent of a C average or
GPA of 2.0 or higher (some exceptions may apply). If a student loses aid due to failure to maintain SAP, they
must reestablish SAP before aid can recommence, assuming the student is otherwise eligible. The full SAP
policy can be found on the COA website and in the office of financial aid.
Credit issued for any courses taken as P/F versus a grade is treated, for financial aid purposes, as the
equivalent of a C or 2.0 GPA. Students should be aware of the implications of this and the potential impact on
their overall GPA at any given time.

ACADEMIC PROBATION
Students who receive a D, F, or NC (fails to receive credit in a class taken credit/no-credit) in a given term,
or have two or more extensions, are automatically placed on academic probation. There are three levels
of academic probation, and the changes to the criteria for getting off of academic probation require more
18

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

consistent academic success in subsequent terms. Students on academic probation are notified in writing (as
are their advisors) and the student must attend a mandatory meeting with the academic probation officer or the
provost within the first three weeks of the subsequent term. Such meetings are used to identify and address the
issues causing the student to get probationary status and to ensure successful future terms. Failure to attend a
probation meeting will result in blocked registration for the upcoming term. Although academic probation is a
serious issue, the tenor of this meeting is to be constructive and supportive, not punitive.
In order to be removed from academic probation, the student must pass all of their classes in the subsequent
term with grades of C or higher and receive no new extensions. Students on academic probation are not
considered in good academic standing. Students on academic probation are not eligible for independent
studies, residencies, EcoLeague, or other consortium exchanges. If a student remains on academic probation for
a second consecutive term, the student will have an academic contract created for them. Academic contracts
are individually constructed and have carefully defined outcomes targeted to enhance the student’s success.
Example contract conditions may include, but not be limited to:
•

Reduced course load for the subsequent term

•

Mandatory attendance at study skills group

•

Mandatory check-in meetings with advisors/teachers/counselors

•

Required work with a writing tutor

•

Requirements that students turn in no late work and/or miss no classes

Included in the academic contract will be clearly spelled out consequences for failing to meet the terms of the
contract. International students and the academic probation officer should be attentive to the consequences
academic probation has for maintaining F-1 student status and for eligibility to remain in the United States.
The academic probation officer is appointed by the provost. The academic probation officer has discretion
to interpret the above procedures to support student success while maintaining high academic standards.
Decisions made by the academic probation officer may be appealed to the provost or their designee, whose
decision is then final.
In order to be removed from academic probation, a student must pass their classes with a C or higher in the
subsequent term with no extensions.
After three consecutive terms on academic probation, or accumulating a total of five Fs, students will be
suspended from the college for one academic year.
**Students who return from the one-year academic suspension will be on level-three probation. Failure to
receive grades of C or above and any course extensions will lead to expulsion.

TRANSFER CREDIT
A student can transfer a maximum of 18 credits to COA, the equivalent of 60 semester credit hours or 90
quarter hours in systems commonly used at other institutions. One COA credit is equivalent to 3.3 semester
hours or five quarter hours. Work at another accredited institution is transferable with a grade of C or above
and approval by the registrar, and will appear on the COA transcript with a grade of CR. Except for students
receiving VA benefits, COA degree candidates may elect not to use transfer credit toward the degree even
though all work from previous institutions must be submitted during the admission process. Transfer credits
must be authorized by the student before the registrar can apply them to the student’s transcript. Once transfer
credit has been applied to a student’s COA record, it cannot be removed.
A transfer student bringing in nine or more COA credits is exempt from the first-year requirements (Human
Ecology Core Course, history, writing, and QR courses). A student transferring in 18 credits is encouraged to
begin planning for the completion of degree requirements and to select an advising team as soon as possible.
New transfer students should first make sure that the registrar’s office has received final transcripts of all
previous college course work; students are often accepted for admission before the final transcript of previous
work is available, and students must send for an update to ensure that all transfer credits are applied.
First-time, first-year students who have taken college courses while enrolled in high school may elect to transfer
in these credits after they have earned nine COA credits. This transfer of credits does not exempt them from the
first-year requirements.
A COA student planning to take a course or a term of work as a visiting student at another college is advised to

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

19

get approval in advance from the registrar of eligibility for credit transfer. Credit is rarely granted for work done
at non-accredited institutions. Proposed study of this type must be evaluated and approved for transferability in
advance by the review and appeals committee.

CREDIT BY EXAM OR MILITARY EXPERIENCE
A maximum of one term (three credits) may be given for credit by examination or military experience. Advanced
Placement (AP), International Baccalaureate (IB), and other successful examinations may also serve as
prerequisites for COA courses. AP and IB credits cannot be used to meet HY, QR or resource area requirements.
Students entering as first-time, first-year students must earn nine COA credits before AP or IB credits may be
applied to their COA transcript.
•

Advanced Placement: Scores of four or higher on AP exams are acceptable for transfer.

•

International Baccalaureate: Scores of five or higher on IB Higher Level exams are acceptable for transfer.
Standard Level exam scores are not eligible for transfer.

•

DANTES: Passing exam scores are eligible for credit under the American Council on Education
recommendations. Requests for credit are handled on a case-by-case basis. Contact the registrar’s office
for more information.

•

Military training experience: May be acceptable for credit under the American Council on Education
guidelines. As with DANTES, credit requests are handled on a case-by-case basis. Contact the registrar’s
office for more information.

Official scores and transcripts must be mailed directly to the registrar’s office. Advanced standing credit earned
while in high school is held in reserve and may not be recorded on the student’s record until the beginning of
the student’s second year. A student has the opportunity any time after their first year to request the addition
of these credits to their transcript. The amount of credit transferred affects the long-term eligibility for federal
financial aid funds and speed of progress toward graduation; a student is strongly advised to discuss their
individual situation and timetable with academic and financial advisors.

GRADUATION AND SENIOR YEAR
Students should submit intent to graduate forms in the winter term prior to the academic year in which they
intend to graduate. There are a number of important deadlines that fall during the student’s senior year—e.g.,
the human ecology essay, the senior project, and the certification of graduation requirements. It is the
student’s responsibility to adhere to all published deadlines, even in the event that the student is away from
campus.
In some cases students may stand at graduation even if they have not completed all graduation requirements.
Students who stand may participate in all graduation ceremonies and celebrations, but will not receive a
diploma nor be considered a graduate of the college until all graduation requirements are met. Students may
participate in only one graduation ceremony.
Students who wish to stand must submit a completed standing contract form to the provost for the
privilege to do so. This contract must include a detailed plan, with clear deadlines, for completing all degree
requirements.
A student may stand only if they have three or less COA credits remaining. If these credits are for the senior
project, the student must have their senior project proposal fully approved at the time they petition to stand.
Students may not stand if they have not completed their human ecology essay, writing portfolio, community
service, or internship.
The provost will decide on this request, in consultation with the student and their advisor(s). The provost’s
decision is final. If the standing contract is accepted, the student is required to submit a $500 deposit,
which is returned in full to the student upon completion of all work/graduation. Standing is not an option for
graduate students.

20

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

LEAVE OF ABSENCE
A student may request a leave of absence for one term at a time (up to three terms total). Forms for this
purpose are available in the registrar’s office and online. Approval depends upon justification of the leave in the
context of the student’s overall academic plan. Failure to file a request for leave by the end of the add/drop
period for any given term results in automatic withdrawal from the college.
A student who has either formally withdrawn from the college or lost matriculant status, as stated above,
but desires to return to the college, must complete a short re-application form, available from the office of
admission, in order to be reconsidered as a candidate for matriculation.
For purposes of repayment of student loans, a student is considered to be withdrawn as of the end of the last
term of enrollment, even though they are on an approved leave of absence. For COA purposes, the student
can continue as a degree candidate not enrolled. For loan purposes, however, a student is either a registered,
tuition-paying student or not. This rule applies to students away on non-credit internships and to seniors whose
last enrollment (usually the senior project) takes place in a term earlier than spring term prior to graduation.

MEDICAL LEAVE
College of the Atlantic strives to maintain an environment that supports intellectual wellbeing and academic
excellence. Nevertheless, unexpected circumstances can and do occur that affect a student’s ability to succeed
in COA’s rigorous intellectual climate. The following policy is intended to facilitate a student’s necessary
departure from and subsequent re-entry into the college.
A medical leave of absence is available for students who have medical or psychiatric conditions that severely
limit their ability to perform academic work. Students who need this type of leave of absence must meet
with the dean of student life and the provost. All medical leaves must have the written recommendation of a
physician or mental health professional. Medical leaves are usually granted for up to three terms. Medical leaves
are not possible after week eight of the term.
Students who take a medical leave during a term will earn no academic credit for the term and their class
enrollments will show a grade of W (withdrawn). They will be refunded for tuition and room as dictated by the
refund policy detailed in this catalog. During the time of the leave, students must actively engage in appropriate
treatment as recommended by their physician or therapist.
Return and re-enrollment from a medical leave of absence are contingent on a written assessment by a
physician or therapist that is evaluated by the dean of student life in consultation with on-campus health
services staff. The dean of student life will then establish a re-entry plan (e.g. referral to a local specialist,
ongoing treatment plan) as necessary with the returning student to ensure that they are fully aware of the
resources available to support them. The provost will meet with the student to review an appropriate academic
course load upon their return to the college.
In the event that a student’s continuation at the college poses a significant risk to the wellbeing of that student
or to others in the community, the dean of student life can place a student on involuntary medical leave. The
student may appeal this decision (in writing) to the president of the college within five working days.

ADDITIONAL PROGRAMS
EDUCATIONAL STUDIES AND TEACHER CERTIFICATION
COA has been granted authority by the state of Maine to recommend successful program completers for Maine
licensure. Preparation for teaching certification is available in the following areas: art education (grades K–12);
elementary education (grades K–8); and secondary certification (grades 7–12) in English language arts, life
sciences, and social studies. COA has an excellent working partnership with the local public and private schools.
This relationship affords our students the opportunity to practice what they learn by getting them abundant,
hands-on experiences in classrooms, afterschool programs, museums, alternative educational settings,
COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

21

and summer camps. Students electing to pursue professional teacher certification may either complete 15
weeks of student teaching as an internship or take three additional credits beyond the COA graduation
requirement. Maine is a signatory of the National Association of State Directors of Teacher Education and
Certification interstate agreement with 47 other states, the District of Columbia, Guam, and the Department of
Defense schools.
The interactive and interdisciplinary nature of education at College of the Atlantic serves as a model for
the kind of education our students hope to create as teachers. Many graduates are teachers in public and
private schools; others have chosen careers as outdoor educators, interpretive naturalists, and environmental
educators.

STUDY ABROAD
Study abroad or study away opportunities allow students to take classes outside of COA for up to 18 credits.
Students take courses in language studies, international public health, culture and ethnic studies, and other
academic fields at accredited institutions within the United States or elsewhere around the world. Students can
begin to plan ahead with support from their advisors, guidance from the internship and career services office
about funding sources, and the college’s financial aid office, in addition to the registrar’s office for approval
of transfer credits outside of COA. International students should speak with the coordinator of international
student services.
Students must be in good academic standing and have the appropriate documentation completed in advance of
a term/semester away. Programs regularly attended by COA students, such as School for International Training,
SEA|mester, SEA Education, and Center for Ecological Living and Learning offer scholarship assistance. These
are just a few of the many options available for study abroad and students are encouraged to contact the
internship program director.

CONSORTIUM AGREEMENTS
It is possible to set up a consortium with many accredited colleges/universities in the US and abroad.
Consortium agreements allow you to take courses at another school and still use your COA federal financial aid
awards. Students must have completed a minimum of three terms at COA and be in good academic and social
standing. Credits will appear on your COA transcript as transfer credits. See the financial aid office for more
information.
EcoLeague exchange: The EcoLeague is a consortium of six colleges and universities that share similar missions
and value systems based on environmental responsibility, social change, and educating students to build a
sustainable future. The EcoLeague consists of small, liberal arts institutions with strong environmental science,
marine biology, outdoor studies, education, and other academic programs. These colleges all stress experiential
education so that students are prepared to take on real-world challenges when they graduate. EcoLeague
partners are Prescott College, Alaska Pacific University, New College of Florida, Northland College, Dickinson
College, and College of the Atlantic.
How the EcoLeague works:
•

EcoLeague exchanges are open to students studying any academic area.

•

Students must have completed nine COA credits to be considered.

•

COA students may spend up to two semesters (one year) at the host EcoLeague institution during their
second or third years.

•

Students continue to pay full-time tuition to their home institution. Lab and course fees, room and
board, and any required fees are paid to the institution the student is visiting. Additional costs for special
programs and travel are covered by the student.

•

Credits earned at EcoLeague institutions are accepted at the home institution as COA credits (not transfer
credits).

•

Students must fill out an intent to participate form, available from the registrar’s office, and once approved,
the participation/registration form.

•

Students are expected to return to their home institution upon completion of the EcoLeague semester(s).

See the registrar or provost for more details.
22

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

University of Maine: Any degree seeking undergraduate student enrolled at COA or the University of Maine is
eligible to participate in a cooperative exchange after completing two terms as a full-time student as defined
by their home institution. College of the Atlantic students may enroll for coursework at the University of Maine
and UMaine students may enroll for coursework at COA. This exchange is contingent on space availability. See
registrar for more information.

AFFILIATION AGREEMENTS
COA has affiliation agreements with a number of organizations, whereby COA agrees to award credit for courses
offered through their programs. In all cases, students must have completed a minimum of three terms at COA
and be in good academic and social standing to apply. Students must submit a signed consortium agreement
form to the registrar’s office prior to enrollment in the program, and are charged an administrative fee ($500
per COA credit) to process the credits. See registrar for more information.
Center for Ecological Living and Learning (CELL): College of the Atlantic will award credit for study abroad
programs offered by the Center for Ecological Living and Learning (CELL). CELL programs focus on local
and global solutions to environmental, social, and economic problems and are offered in Central America,
East Africa, Iceland, and the Middle East. Students apply directly to CELL and pay tuition and fees to CELL.
Enrollment is limited to a maximum of one semester worth of credit (15 semester credits, equivalent to 4.5 COA
credits).
National Outdoor Leadership School (NOLS): College of the Atlantic will award credit for semester programs
offered by the National Outdoor Leadership School (NOLS). NOLS courses include field studies and practice of
wilderness expedition skills, leadership, group dynamics, safety and judgment development, and an introduction
to environmental studies and ethics. Credit value depends on the length of the NOLS course (variable up to 16
semester credits, equivalent to 4.8 COA credits). Students apply directly to NOLS and pay NOLS fees.
SEA|mester: College of the Atlantic will award credit for academic courses taken on SEA|mester voyages.
Students apply directly to SEA|mester and pay tuition and fees to SEA|mester. Enrollment is limited to a
maximum of one semester worth of credit (12 semester credits, equivalent to 3.6 COA credits).

GRADUATE PROGRAM
Since 1990, COA has offered the Master of Philosophy in human ecology degree. This program is intended
both for COA graduates who want to extend the type of work begun as undergraduates and for students from
elsewhere who want to add a human-ecological focus to their research. The MPhil is designed as a two-year
program, involving nine credits of course work (from upper level courses in the integrated curriculum and
nine credits of thesis research). The graduate committee, composed of the director of the graduate program
and faculty representatives from each resource area, is responsible for administering the MPhil program; the
director reports to the president and provost. Any graduate student requesting a waiver or variance of any
graduate degree requirements must submit a petition in writing to the graduate committee, which will discuss
the matter as needed with the academic affairs committee.
Enrollment: Students are expected to enroll full time in each term of their first year of graduate study, during
which most or all of the nine required graduate course credits are to be completed. In second or subsequent
years, students are encouraged to maintain full-time status and study on campus until graduation, but may
petition their thesis committee and the director of the graduate program for formal approval of part-time
enrollment or leaves of absence in a given term. All degree requirements must be completed within four years
of first enrollment in the MPhil program. Newly admitted graduate students may begin their enrollment in any
academic term.
Thesis committee: Upon arrival at COA, each graduate student establishes a thesis committee composed of
a chair, someone identified at the time of acceptance into the program and keenly interested in the student’s
research topic, at least one other COA faculty member, and an optional outside practitioner or expert in the
student’s field of inquiry. Working with the thesis committee, the student designs their program, including
a nine-credit thesis project and nine course credits relevant to the thesis. During the thesis year, a faculty
member from the graduate committee may join the thesis committee to serve as a reader and to advise
regarding general policy matters. Graduate students are expected to schedule meetings of their committee as
a group at least once a term. Following this meeting the chair of the committee will report progress towards the
degree to the graduate program director.
Plan of study and thesis proposal: Graduate students are required to turn in a plan of study at the end of their
COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

23

first term of enrollment. A thesis proposal is due at the end of the third term. Individualized graduate programs
should combine several academic disciplines, have a strong field or applied component, or broaden current
research in human ecology.
Graduate courses: Graduate course credits may come from intermediate- or advanced-level courses, tutorials,
and independent studies. Expectations for graduate course credit are arranged in discussion between each
graduate student and the faculty member teaching a course. It is the responsibility of each graduate student to
initiate these discussions at the beginning of each term. Graduate credit cannot be given for introductory level
courses, group studies, courses in which the student does not receive the equivalent of a B- or better, or courses
which are not completed within an academic year. If a graduate student takes a course credit/no credit, the
student must attain the equivalent of grade B- or better to receive credit.
Transfer credits: A maximum of three of the nine course credits may be transfer credits. All transfer of credit is
subject to approval by the thesis committee and director of the graduate program. Credits from prior academic
work must be upper-level courses relevant to the student’s plan of study at COA, earned within one calendar
year prior to first enrollment in the MPhil program, and from academic work above and beyond any courses that
were a part of the student’s undergraduate program. Transfer of credits during graduate enrollment must be
approved in advance.
Thesis credits: During those terms in which thesis credits are taken, students are encouraged to be in
residence on campus and to meet with the chair of the thesis committee frequently for discussion, direction,
and advice. They should also meet regularly with other members of their committee. The nine requisite
thesis credits are not graded, but each is assessed as satisfactory or unsatisfactory by the chair of the thesis
committee and reported to the registrar. Students are expected to submit a proposed plan of study for thesis
credits at the beginning of each term where such credits are to be taken. This plan will indicate the intended
focus for that term (literature review, writing thesis sections, field, lab or studio work, etc.). At the end of
each term where thesis credits are to be awarded the student will submit a short summary of what they have
accomplished.
The thesis: A thesis, required of all graduate students, investigates a specific area with rigor, allowing the
student to gain and demonstrate expertise in a particular topic and make an original contribution to the field.
The thesis is judged on rigor, relevance, and results. The thesis must have an interdisciplinary component;
sections of a thesis may be rather specialized but at least part of it must be accessible to a general audience.
The college welcomes theses that take non-traditional forms, depending on the student’s field and audience.
Each thesis must be carefully documented and demonstrate a high standard of scholarship. The form and
structure of the thesis is to be shaped by consideration and knowledge of similar theses in a student’s field, by
the structure and design of the project, and suggestions of the thesis committee. A thesis of traditional form
includes a title page (with signatures), acknowledgments, a table of contents, a list of figures, an abstract, the
body of the thesis, a bibliography, endnotes, and appendices. Three copies of the final version of the thesis, each
on thesis bond paper, must be submitted (bound or unbound) to the graduate committee prior to graduation.
Note: See the COA archivist for information on formatting copies for the COA archives, due at the end of week
nine.
Thesis presentation: Each graduate student will arrange a public presentation of their thesis a minimum of
two weeks prior to the expected date of graduation. All thesis committee members are expected to attend this
presentation, and the student will be examined on the form and content of the thesis.
Graduate seminar: A graduate seminar is scheduled periodically to provide a forum for discussing issues
in human ecology, sharing research skills, critiquing each other’s work, and fostering scholarship and
identity among graduate students. Participants in the graduate seminar include all graduate students and
representatives of the graduate committee, thesis advisors, and any invited participants.

IMMUNIZATION REQUIREMENT
Maine state law requires that all students provide certification by a doctor, nurse, or other health official of their
immunity to rubella (German measles), rubeola (measles), diphtheria, and tetanus. Evidence of immunity may be
demonstrated with either a record of immunization with dates and dosages or a report of laboratory results of
tests for immunity.
•

24

MMR (measles/mumps/rubella). Two doses of MMR vaccine, administered after the student’s first birthday.

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

•

DT, Td or TDaP (diphtheria/tetanus) within the last ten years

As of September 1, 2021, the State of Maine does not allow religious or philosophical exemptions to required
immunizations. Students seeking a medical exemption must provide a written statement from a licensed
physician, nurse practitioner, or physician’s assistant that, in that provider’s professional judgment,
immunization against one or more of the diseases may be medically inadvisable. If you have a state-approved
medical exemption and an outbreak of any of these diseases should occur, you would be asked to leave the
campus for the duration.
The criteria for medical exemption articulated in the law are as follows.
Medical exemptions to receiving tetanus-diphtheria toxoid are limited to: 1) having received tetanus toxoid
or tetanus-diphtheria toxoid within five years of enrollment; 2) A hypersensitivity reaction to a prior dose of
tetanus toxoid or tetanus-diphtheria toxoid.
Medical exemptions to receiving measles, mumps, and rubella vaccine (MMR) are limited to: 1) pregnancy, or
those students planning to become pregnant within three months; 2) a history of anaphylactic reaction following
egg ingestion or receipt of neomycin; 3) students with altered immunocompetence, as occurs with leukemia,
lymphoma, generalized malignancy, or therapy with alkylating agents, anti-metabolites, radiation, or large doses
of corticosteroids.   
Students must either provide proof of immunization or of a medical exemption before they will be allowed
to attend in-person classes at COA. If already immunized, the student must send or bring a copy of the
immunization record signed by the health professionals who either administered the shots or have the
records. Shots are available in Bar Harbor at the local health facilities; the COA nurse can also administer the
immunizations.
COVID-19 immunization requirement
College of the Atlantic requires that all students are vaccinated against COVID-19, and up to date with their
vaccinations, in order to take part in the 2022-23 academic program. Persons are considered up to date
with COVID-19 vaccinations when they have received all doses in the primary series and all recommended
boosters, when eligible.
All students are required to submit proof of vaccination or apply for a medical or religious exemption. If the
vaccine is available in your area, it is our full expectation that you will arrive on campus fully vaccinated,
unless you have an approved exemption for medical or religious reasons.
Students seeking a medical or religious exemption must complete the appropriate vaccination exemption
request form, found on the student portal. If you have a college-approved medical or religious exemption
to the COVID-19 vaccination, you will be expected to follow US Centers for Disease Control protocols should
you test positive for COVID-19 or be deemed a close contact.
Students must provide either proof of immunization or an approved exemption before they will be allowed
to attend in-person classes at COA.

REGISTRATION AND FEES
REGISTRATION
Registration for an academic term takes place during week six of the preceding term. Registration materials are
available approximately one week prior to registration. Students register online through their student portal.
Student accounts must be paid in full in order to access online registration.
Returning students registering for classes after the registration deadline will be assessed a $100 late
registration fee. If this late registration happens after the payment due date, the student will have one week to
settle their account with the business office. Failure to settle the account will result in an additional $300 late
payment fee. Students may not register for classes after the end of week two.
Late payment policies do not apply to students receiving VA benefits.
A student must have paid or made arrangements to pay all tuition and fees by the statement due date. The
COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

25

college accepts payment plans with an outside agency, however these plans must be in place, approved, and
current by the statement due date. If previous payment plans were delinquent in the past, COA reserves the
right to refuse the establishment of a new payment plan.

ADD/DROP
A student may make registration changes through the first week of the term by submitting an add/drop form to
the registrar’s office. After the add/drop period has ended, the student’s current registration can be viewed on
their portal. If the student feels that an error has been made on the schedule, they should notify a staff member
in the registrar’s office immediately.
Add/drop forms returned to the registrar’s office after the add/drop deadline will be assessed a $100 late
fee. Appeals may be granted for extenuating circumstances; such appeals will be reviewed by the Review and
Appeals Committee.

WITHDRAWAL
A student may withdraw from a class up through the end of week four by submitting an add/drop form
specifying the request for withdrawal. A grade of W (withdrawal) will appear on the student’s transcript.
Students should be aware of the tuition reimbursement policy for withdrawals (refer to the course withdrawal/
financial considerations section for more information). A student wishing to withdraw after the fourth week may
only do so with written consent from the course instructor and approval by the provost. Withdrawals are not
permitted after week eight.

AUDITORS
Students are allowed to audit one course during a term with the instructor’s permission and with payment of
the $150 audit fee. Auditing is entirely at the discretion of the instructor. Instructors cannot accept auditors if
they have had to turn away credit-seeking students. Appeal for conversion of audit to credit in a case in which
the student has actually participated in a course as a full-credit student must be made to review and appeals
committee no later than the end of the fifth week of the term; this action does require payment of additional forcredit fees on the part of the student. Audits show on transcripts as AU.
Individuals from the Bar Harbor community may also audit a COA course with permission of the instructor and
payment of $150 plus any applicable lab fees, providing that no COA matriculant will be displaced. Auditing
is limited to one course per term. No refunds will be given for audited courses. All fees are due the date of
registration.

NON-DEGREE SEEKING STUDENTS
Persons desiring undergraduate credit may enroll as special students if they meet the prerequisites of the
desired courses and have the permission of the instructor. Long-term residents of Hancock, Washington, and
Waldo counties may enroll for a limited number of courses, on a space-available basis, at a reduced-tuition rate.
To be eligible for this special rate Hancock County status must be determined by the office of admission prior to
registration. Other special students pay regular, full-tuition rates. The number of Hancock County courses taken
per student is restricted to three per year. Only three Hancock County classes may apply toward matriculation.
Special students are expected to pay at the time of registration. Lab and activity fees apply. More information
on policies and procedures for special students is available in the registrar’s and admission offices.

TUITION
•

All fees are billed in June, July, November, and February, and must be paid by the specified due date.

•

The total annual undergraduate tuition for 2022-23 is $44,280. Tuition is charged at a flat rate of $4,920
per credit, or $14,760 per term for full-time enrollment (plus housing/dining charges and other fees). An
additional fourth credit or less-than-full-time enrollment is calculated accordingly. Costs for one year at
COA, including tuition, housing, food, books, materials, and miscellaneous expenses, may be estimated at
$56,669.

•

Summer enrollment is considered the first term of the next academic year.

26

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

•

The fee for internships taken for credit, regardless of the length of the work period, is $14,760; the
internship is a full-time enrollment earning three COA credits.

•

Senior projects are worth three academic credits and therefore are also charged at the full-tuition rate.

•

COA alumnx enrolling for student teaching after graduation will pay for three credits at the Hancock County
rate. Non-matriculating students wishing to complete student teaching at COA will be charged for three
credits—Hancock/Washington/Waldo county discount may apply if the student meets the criteria.

•

Members of COA staff families receive tuition reduction per defined policy guidelines, but pay applicable
student services fees.

•

Full-time graduate tuition rates are $9,840 per term. Additional associated fees and penalties apply as
outlined for undergraduates. Hancock County rates do not apply for graduate students.

•

If a non-credit class or internship from a prior academic year is changed to credit, the costs of that credit
will be at the current year’s rates.

PAYMENT OF BILLS
Students have access to account statements on their student portal. Paper bills are not mailed. Students must
have either paid or made arrangements to pay all tuition and fees by the payment due dates. A late payment fee
of $300 will be assessed on overdue accounts.
PAYMENT DUE DATES:
•

Fall: August 12, 2022

•

Winter: December 5, 2022

•

Spring: March 24, 2023

•

Summer 2023: July 10, 2023

•

Fall 2023: August 7, 2023

COA accepts payment plans with an outside agency, however, the approved plan must be in place and remain
current. The college is able to assist students and/or their parents in working out a payment plan. College of the
Atlantic accepts MasterCard and Visa for bill payments up to $1,000 a term. In the event that a check is returned
to College of the Atlantic for insufficient funds, the student account will be charged a $40 service fee. Online
payments may be made through NELNET at mycollegepaymentplan.com/atlantic. If wiring funds please request
instructions from the business office. Bills for special term enrollment (i.e. Yucatan/Cavilam), where the student
starts the term before the regular COA term begins, will be due one week before the student leaves for the
program. International and special deposits are non-refundable.
A late payment fee of $300 will be assessed on overdue accounts and on delinquent payment plans. Students
will not be allowed to register for the next term if there is an outstanding balance on their account. If a student
has had a late payment in a prior term, COA may unenroll the student from the upcoming term if that payment is
not paid by the due date. Transcripts, grades, or diplomas will not be released until the student account is paid in
full. Late payment policies do not apply to students receiving VA benefits.

BILLING ERRORS
Students understand that administrative, clerical, or technical billing errors do not absolve them of their
financial responsibility to pay the correct amount of tuition, fees and other associated financial obligations
assessed as a result of their registration at College of the Atlantic.

HOUSING AND DINING
The fee for a room in COA housing is $6,210 per year. There is a non-refundable $100 housing application fee
charged to all students living in housing. The full meal plan is $3,660 per year (all first-time students living in
COA housing are on the full meal plan). For those students living off campus and not opting to be on the full
meal plan, there are three additional meal plan options they must choose from: ten meals/week for $2,850, five
meals/week for $1,650, or a $100 declining balance card. Meals/week plans are not transferable from term to
term. Declining meal plan balances can be used from term to term but expire at the end of the academic year.
COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

27

STUDENT ACTIVITIES FEE
A $183 student services fee is charged each term for every enrolled student, whether the student is on campus
or not. This covers the cost of visits to the campus health clinic (lab work or other tests are not covered by the
fee) and helps fund student activities. The fund is managed by the Student Activities Committee.

LAB FEES
Laboratory fees are charged by the term for courses in which expendable materials are used and/or field trips
are required. These fees usually range from $10 to $50, but may be higher depending on the nature of the
class (e.g. lab and art classes have more consumables). Amounts may or may not be known in time for catalog
printing, but will be listed on registration materials and billed with tuition. Lab fees are not subject to refund
after the add/drop period.

CREDIT BALANCE RETURNS
In the event a student’s bill has been overpaid, a credit balance return (CBR) will be automatically issued to the
student after add/drop has been completed and all financial aid for the student has been received and applied
to the student’s account each term. If the CBR is a result of a PLUS loan, overpayment by a parent, or from a
parent payment plan (NELNET), the refund will be returned to the parent unless a signed authorization from
the parent is given to the business office to return the funds directly to the student. Parent authorizations
are needed each term. Credit balance returns will not be automatically processed for overpayment from
international payments, a 529 plan, or other unique payment. Students will be notified when a CBR is available
for pickup in the business office; checks are not put in student mailboxes. If the credit is to be left on account for
a future term, then written authorization to the business office is required.

COURSE WITHDRAWALS/FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS
Full course withdrawal: Students who register for a term but withdraw from all courses, either for medical or
non-medical reasons, by 4:00 p.m. on the add/drop deadline will receive a full reversal except for program fees,
which are non-refundable (and see health insurance below). Additionally, a prorated charge for any days of room
and board will be assessed. Students who withdraw from all classes in weeks two through five will receive a
daily prorated refund based upon the cash amount paid for the current term. No additional billing adjustments
are computed for housing and meals as they are already included in the amount paid. There are no reversals
after week one for the student services fee, program fees, or lab fees (and see health insurance below). In the
rare case of a student staying on campus for more than one night after dropping all classes, COA will assess a
prorated charge for room and board. Federal aid adjustments and outside scholarships will be adjusted per the
laws of such aid.
If a student is enrolled in a COA-sponsored international or off-campus program and drops the program after
the deposit deadline but before the program begins, a $500 fee will be assessed. If a student drops the program
once the program begins, the standard reversal policy above applies.
Health insurance during full course withdrawal: Except in the case of a medical leave of absence due to
sickness or injury, any student who withdraws from all courses during the first 31 days of classes will not be
covered under the insurance plan. A full refund of the premium will be made, minus the cost of any claim
benefits paid since the effective date. If a student withdraws from all classes after 31 days, they will remain
covered for the term purchased and no refund will be allowed. For additional information please visit your
student health insurance website.
Partial course withdrawal: Students who drop one or two courses will receive credit toward tuition for a future
term based upon the chart below. This credit must be used within the next four consecutive terms and will be
factored into computing that term’s financial aid award. The student may not apply the credit to a prior term
balance. All balances must be paid prior to application of this credit.
Reversal credit schedule per courses dropped:
•

Add/drop deadline:

Full tuition and lab fee reversal, excluding non-refundable program fees

•

Week two:		

$4,000 credit toward tuition for a future term

•

Week three:		

$2,500 credit toward tuition for a future term

28

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

•

Week four:		

$1,500 credit toward tuition for a future term

•

Week five:		

$500 credit toward tuition for a future term

•

Weeks 6–10:		

No credit or reversal

The date used to determine the reversal amount is the date the completed paperwork is turned in to the
registrar’s office.

FINANCIAL AID AND WORK-STUDY
Financial aid information is available in the financial aid office. The financial aid program is explained in detail
in the COA publication Financial Planning Options, which is available from the office of admission and financial
aid. Students applying for financial assistance at COA must complete the Free Application for Federal Student
Aid (FAFSA) and COA’s institutional application for financial aid. New applicants should file online at fafsa.gov.
Renewal applicants receive a renewal FAFSA from the federal processor via email. COA’s application for financial
aid is distributed to students’ mailboxes and via email, usually before winter break. In a case where a student’s
natural parents are divorced or separated, the college requires that the non-custodial parent complete the noncustodial parent’s statement (available from the office of admission and financial aid) in order for the student to
be considered for institutional sources of financial aid.
The timetable below applies for financial aid applications prior to the fall term:
•

January 1–February 15:

Financial aid applications should be completed and mailed

•

April 1–June 15: 		

COA mails financial aid replies to on-time applicants

While late application does not necessarily disqualify a student from financial aid, it may reduce the student’s
award if COA funds have already been allocated. Students who register on time receive priority in the awarding
of COA institutional financial aid.
Financial aid awards are generally calculated assuming full-time enrollment. Adjustments to the award are
made if a student is enrolled less than full time. Awards are also subject to adjustment if a student receives
additional outside resources after the award is tendered or if a student’s costs are lower than originally
projected. Students are expected to complete the requirements for their self-directed programs within the 36
required COA credits and are generally not eligible to receive institutional financial aid beyond this credit limit.
It is further required that a student maintain satisfactory progress toward successful completion of the human
ecology degree (see section on satisfactory academic progress).
Further details regarding COA’s financial aid satisfactory academic progress policy as well as general financial
aid policies and procedures are available in the financial aid office and on the COA website.
Work-study assignments are managed by the financial aid office. Once assigned, a student sets up their workstudy schedule with the job supervisor. The student and the work-study supervisor keep records of hours
worked, and the student is responsible for submitting their hours online every other week.

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

29

PART II

FACULTY MEMBERS 2022–2023
Anderson, John: BA, University of California, Berkeley;
MA, San Francisco State University; PhD, University of
Rhode Island. zoology, behavioral ecology, anatomy,
physiology
Andrews, Nancy: BFA, Maryland Institute College of
Art; MFA, The School of the Art Institute of Chicago.
performance art, video production
Baker, Jodi: BA, California State University, Fresno;
MFA, National Theatre Conservatory, Denver Center
for Performing Arts. performing arts
Baker, Laurie: BS, The University of St. Andrews; MS,
Dalhousie University; PhD, University of Glasgow.
ecology, evolution, computer science
Cline, Kenneth: BA, Hiram College; JD, Case Western
Reserve University. public policy, environmental law
Clinger, Catherine: BFA, University of Kansas; MA,
University of New Mexico; MPhil, University College
London; PhD, University of London. art history, studio
arts
Colbert, Dru: BFA, Auburn University; MFA, The School
of the Art Institute of Chicago. visual communications,
3D art and design, museum studies
Collum, Kourtney: BS, Western Michigan University;
MS, University of Maine; PhD, University of Maine.
food systems and sustainable agriculture
Cox, J. Gray: BA, Wesleyan University; PhD, Vanderbilt
University. philosophy, peace studies and language
learning
Feldman, David: BA, Carleton College; PhD, University
of California, Davis. mathematics, physics
Henderson, Jonathan: BA, Guilford College; MA, Duke
University; PhD Duke University. ethnomusicology,
African American Studies, music
Friedlander, John Jay: BA, Colgate University; MBA,
Olin Graduate School of Business at Babson College.
green business
Hall, Sarah: BA, Hamilton College; PhD, University of
California, Santa Cruz. geology, earth science
Hess, Helen: BS, University of California, Los Angeles;
PhD, University of Washington. invertebrate zoology,
biomechanics
Hill, Kenneth: BA, University of Michigan; EdM,
Harvard University; MS, PhD, Cornell University.
education, psychology
Hudson, Reuben: BA, Vassar College; PhD, McGill
University. chemistry

Letcher, Susan: BA, Carleton College; PhD, University
of Connecticut, Storrs. plant biology
Little-Siebold, Todd: BA, MA, University of
Massachusetts, Amherst; PhD, Tulane University.
history, Latin American studies
McKown, Jamie: BA, Emory University; MA, Georgia
State University; PhD, Northwestern University.
government, polity
Morse, Suzanne: BA, PhD, University of California,
Berkeley. applied botany, plant ecology, agricultural
ecology
Petersen, Christopher: BA, University of California,
Santa Barbara; PhD, University of Arizona.
ichthyology, marine ecology
Ressel, Stephen: BS, Millersville University; MS,
University of Vermont; PhD, University of Connecticut.
vertebrate biology, environmental physiology
Stabinsky, Doreen: BA, Lehigh University; PhD,
University of California, Davis. agriculture policy,
international studies, global environmental affairs
Tai, Bonnie: BA, Johns Hopkins University; EdM, EdD,
Harvard University. educational theory, research, and
practice
Taneja, Palak: BA, University of Delhi; MA, University
of Delhi; PhD, Emory University. Digital humanities,
global Anglophone, postcolonial literature.
Tardif, Twila: BS, University of Toronto; MS and PhD,
Yale University. Psychology
Taylor, Davis: BS, United States Military Academy;
MS, PhD, University of Oregon. environmental and
resource economics
Todd, Sean: BSc, University College of North Wales;
PhD, Memorial University of Newfoundland. marine
mammal physiology and behavior
van Vliet, Netta: BA, Lewis and Clark College; MA, PhD,
Duke University. cultural anthropology, Israeli studies
Waldron, Karen: BA, Hampshire College; MA,
University of Massachusetts; MA, PhD, Brandeis
University. literature and writing; minority, cultural,
and feminist theory; American studies

EMERITUS
Beal, Elmer: BA, Bowdoin College; MA, University of
Texas at Austin. ethnology, anthropological theory,
traditional music

Lakey, Heather: BA, MPhil, College of the Atlantic;
PhD, University of Maine. women, gender, and
sexuality studies
COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

31

Borden, Richard: BA, University of Texas; PhD,
Psychology, Kent State University. environmental
psychology, personality and social development,
contemporary psychology, philosophy of human
ecology

Stover, Candice: BA, Northeastern University; MA,
Pennsylvania State University. writing, literature

Carpenter, JoAnne: BA, University of Massachusetts;
MA, University of Minnesota; MFA, University of
Pennsylvania. art history, architectural history,
painting

Alex, Joanne: BA Colby College; MEd, University of
Maine. education

ADJUNCT FACULTY

Beard, Ronald E.: BS, MS, University of Maine, Orono.
community leadership

Carpenter, William: BA, Dartmouth College; PhD,
University of Minnesota. literature, creative writing,
comparative mythology

Bennett, Michael A.: BM, University of Maine, Orono.
percussion
Fingerhut, Larrance: BA, New England Conservatory.
improv, piano, music

Katona, Steven: BA, Harvard University; PhD Harvard.
Biology

Gagnon da Silva, Pamela: MS Southern New
Hampshire University. Integrated community mental
health and substance abuse counseling

Kozak, Anne: BA, Salve Regina College; MA, St. Louis
University. writing, literature
Lerner, Susan: BA, University of Cincinnati; California
Institute of Arts. women’s studies

Graham, Carrie: BS, University of Michigan; MS,
University of Maine, Orono. entomology, museum
studies, exhibit/design, resource ecology and
management.

Mancinelli, Isabel: BS, Catholic University of America;
MLA, Harvard University. community and regional
planning, landscape architecture

Greenberg, Arielle: BA, Purchase College; MFA,
Syracuse University. women’s studies, drama,
creative writing

McMullen, Ernest: Art, University of Maryland,
Portland Museum School, Portland State University.
ceramics, visual studies

Leaverton, Lisa: BA, Peabody Conservatory of Music;
MFA, University of Iowa. music, storytelling and
performance

Visvader, John: BA, CUNY; PhD, University of
Minnesota. philosophy, philosophy of science, history
of ideas

Lepcio, Andrea: BA, College of the Atlantic; MFA,
Carnegie Mellon University. writing, plays, theatre

LECTURERS

Lewis, Rhiannon: BA, University of California Berkley;
MA and Phd, Stanford University. english and
American literature.

Capers, Colin: BA, MPhil, College of the Atlantic.
writing, film

Magnuson, Maddy: BA, College of the Atlantic; MS,
University of Southern Maine. human sexual health

Donovan, Martha: BA, Williams College; MA,
Middlebury College. English, literature and writing

McDonald, Richard: BA, State University of New York
ornithology, nature studies

Levin, Rob: BA, Goddard College. Journalism
Mahoney, Daniel: BA, California State University; MFA,
University of Massachusetts, Amherst. writing

Mann, Rocky: BA, University of New Hampshire
Pottery, art

Swann, Scott: BA, MPhil, College of the Atlantic.
ecology, ornithology

Morrell, Hale: BA College of the Atlantic; MS, Yale
University School of Forestry. forest science,
silvaculture, land conservation

Turok, Katharine: BA, Wheaton College; MA, Rutgers
University. comparative literature

Olday, Fred: BA, Pennsylvania State University; MA,
Harvard University; PhD, University of Massachusetts.
botany, plant science

Weber, Jill: BA, University of Northern Colorado; MS,
University of Weber Maine. botany
Winer, Josh: BA, College of the Atlantic; MFA,
Massachusetts College of Art and Design.
photography

Perrin, Linda: BA, University of Wisconsin, Madison.
glassblowing, glass sculpture
Rand, Kendra: BA, Western Washington University;
MA, University of Maine. speech communication,
writing, public speaking

LECTURERS EMERITUS
Demeo, Anna: BS, University of Colorado; MS, PhD,
University of Maine. sustainable energy education and
management
32

Rock, Jenny: BA, College of the Atlantic; PhD,
University of Otago (NZ). science and art integration,
science communication

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

Sanborn, Kelley Rush: BA, Boston College; MA,
Wheelock College. supporting students with
disabilities in the regular classroom
Seddig, Robert: BA, Carleton College; MA, PhD,
Princeton University. Politics
Shepard, Jennifer: BA, University of Iowa. improv,
acting, directing
Wessler, Steve: BA, Harvard College; JD, Boston
University School of Law. human rights, law

FACULTY ASSOCIATES
Frank, Katherine: BA, University of Michigan; MA, PhD,
Duke University. anthropology
Honea-Fleming, Patricia: BA, MA, Georgia State
University; PhD, Purdue University. psychology

RESEARCH ASSOCIATES
Altair, Thiago: MS, Institute of Physics of Sao Carlos,
Brazil; PhD, In progress. thermodynamics and
electrocatalysis
Anderson, Karen: Geographic Information Systems
Specialist, Acadia National Park

Jacobi, Charles: BA, Middlebury College; MS, Virginia
Tech. natural resources
Jones, Leslie: BA, College of the Atlantic; MS/
JD, Vermont Law School. natural resources, land
conservation and the environment
Mainwaring, Alan: BS, Rochester Institute of
Technology; PhD, University of California, Berkeley.
computer science, wireless network monitoring of
habitats
Manski, David: BS, University of Arizona; MS, Texas
A&M. Chief, Division of Resource Management, Acadia
National Park
McGreavey, Bridie: BA, Bates College; MS Antioch
University of New England; PhD, University of Maine,
Orono. communication and sustainability science
Negoita, Luka: BA, College of the Atlantic
O’Keefe, Susan: BA, Saint Petersburg; MS, Oxford
University; conservation and policy.
Rajakaruna, Nishanta: BA College of the Atlantic;
MSc/PhD, The University of British Columbia. botany
and ecology
Rock, Jennifer: BA, College of the Atlantic. zoology,
evolutionary biology

Barkdoll, Edwin: BA, University of Rochester; PhD,
University of Pennsylvania. veterinary medicine

Springuel, Natalie: BA, College of the Atlantic; MS,
Antioch New England. environmental studies and
communication, forest practices

Barrows, Abby: BS, University of Tasmania; BS,
University of Wollongong; M.Phil, College of the
Atlantic. zoology. marine biology

Stevick, Peter: BA, College of the Atlantic. population
biology of humpback whales

Blavascunas, Eunice: BS/BA The Evergreen State
College; MA, University of Texas; MA, PhD, University
of California, Santa Cruz

Todrank, Josephine: BA, College of the Atlantic;
MTS, Boston University School of Theology; MA/PhD,
University of Pennsylvania. evolution of behavior,
olfactory neuroscience

Cole-Will, Rebecca: BA, University of Maine; MA,
University of Alberta. anthropology
Connery, Bruce: Biologist, Acadia National Park
Demeo, Anna: BS, University of Colorado; MS, PhD
University of Maine
DenDanto, Dan: BA, College of the Atlantic. population
biology of fin whales using genetic techniques
Guenther, Carla: BS, Worcester Polytechnic Institute;
PhD, University of California, Santa Cruz
Harris, Tanner: BA, College of the Atlantic; MS,
University of Massachusetts, Amherst
Hazan Connery, Judy: Biologist, Acadia National Park
Helprin, William: BS, St. Lawrence University; MS, Utah
State University; MAT, Kent State University. wildlife
biology and research

Vaux, Peter: BS, University of London; PhD, University
of California, Davis. aquatic ecology, limnology,
landscape theory
Watts, Diana: MA, John Hopkins University;
PhD, University of California, Berkeley. business
administration
Weber, Jill: BA, University of Northern Colorado; MS,
University of Maine, Orono. botany
Wenzel, Fred: BS, Lyndon State College; MS
Northeastern University. biologist and fisheries
researcher
Zoidis, Ann: BA, Smith College; MS, San Francisco
State University. behavioral observations and data
collections of several avian and mammalian species

Heth, Giora: BS/MS/PhD, The Hebrew University of
Jerusalem. chemical communication, evolution of
behavior, olfactory neuroscience

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

33

STAFF MEMBERS 2022–2023
OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT

BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS

Darron Collins: President

Dan Daigle: Director of Buildings, Grounds, and
Campus Security

Kara Daul: Executive Assistant to the President

TBA: Assistant Director of Buildings, Grounds, and
Campus Safety

PROVOST AND DEANS

Donald Bareiss: Night Security

Kenneth Hill: Provost and Chair of Faculty
Development Group

Richard Dow: Mechanical and Building Systems
Manager

Jamie McKown: Associate Dean for Academic Affairs

TBA: Lead Groundskeeper

Bear Paul: Administrative Dean and CFO

Russell Holway: Head Custodian

Christopher Petersen: Director of Graduate Program

TBA: Custodian

Bonnie Tai: Associate Dean for Learning and Teaching;
Co-Director of Education Studies

TBA: Weekend Custodian
Barbara Meyers: Gardener

ACADEMIC SERVICES
Lothar Holzke: Academic Services Administrator
Barbara Carter: Assistant to the Faculty
Kerri Sands: Sustainable Business Program Manager

ADMISSION OFFICE
Heather Albert-Knopp: Dean of Admission

BUSINESS OFFICE
Melissa Cook: Controller
Patricia Pinkham: Business Office Manager and
Benefit Manager
Jenel Thurlow: Accounts Payable Representative
Shana Willey: Accounts Receivable/Student Payroll
Representative

Linda Black: Associate Director of Admission
Ryan Hewlett: Admission Operations Assistant

COMMUNICATIONS

Todd Miner: Assistant Director of Admission

Rob Levin: Director of Communications

Casey Schuller Jordan: Admission Counselor

Dan Mahoney: Editor, COA Magazine

ALLIED WHALE

COMPUTER SERVICES

Mindy Viechnicki: Photo-ID Catalog and Development
Manager

Jarly Bobadilla: IT Systems Manager

Lindsey Jones: Stranding Coordinator
Rosemary Seton: Allied Whale Research Associate,
Marine Mammal Stranding Coordinator

BEECH HILL FARM
Anna Davis: Farm Manager
David Levinson: Farm Manager
Tara Allen: Assistant Farm Manager

BOAT CAPTAIN

Eric Johnson: Acting IT Director
Sean Murphy: Assistant Director of Information
Technology

DEVELOPMENT OFFICE
Shawn Keeley: Dean of Institutional Advancement
Jennifer Hughes: Manager of Alumnx Relations
Caitlin Meredith: Manager of Advancement Services
Kelly Dickson: Grant Writer
Wes Norton: Major Gifts Officer

Toby Stephenson: Captain of M/V Osprey

34

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

EDUCATION STUDIES PROGRAM

STUDENT LIFE

Linda Fuller: Co-Director of Educational Studies

TBA: Dean of Student Life
TBA: Coordinator of International Student Services

FINANCIAL AID
Amy McIntire: Director of Financial Aid
Sydnie White: Financial Aid Specialist

Barbara Conry: Director of Student Support and
Wellness
Ingrid Hill: Operations Manager
Nick Jenei: Coordinator of Community Engagement

FOOD SERVICES

TBA: Director of Residence Life and Student
Experience

Lise Desrochers: Co-Director of Food Services
Ken Sebelin: Co-Director of Food Services
Forest Ball: Cook

SUMMER PROGRAMS
TBA: Coordinator Summer Programs

Conor O’Brien: Baker

GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION
SYSTEMS
Gordon Longsworth: Geographic Information Systems
Lab Director

SUSTAINABILITY & ENERGY
David Gibson: Director of Energy

THORNDIKE LIBRARY
Jane Hultberg: Director of the Thorndike Library

GEORGE B. DORR MUSEUM OF
NATURAL HISTORY
Carrie Graham: Museum Supervisor

INTERNATIONAL STUDIES
Karla Peña: Director, Yucatan Program

Trisha Cantwell Keene: Associate Director of the
Thorndike Library
Wendy Kearny: Weekend Supervisor (nights)
Catherine Preston-Schreck: Library Assistant/ WorkStudy Student Coordinator
Hannah Stevens: Library Specialist for Archiving and
Cataloging
Zach Soares: Audio-Visual Technology Specialist

INTERNSHIPS & CAREER
SERVICES
Jill Barlow-Kelley: Director of Internships and Career
Services

WRITING CENTER
Blake Cass: Assistant Director of the Writing Center

PEGGY ROCKEFELLER FARMS
April Nugent: Farm Manager

REGISTRAR’S OFFICE
Krystal Poulin: Registrar
Kellie Hoffart: Assistant Registrar

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

35

PART III

COURSE LISTINGS 2022–2023

ARTS & DESIGN
AD 1019 Four-Dimensional Studio
ANDREWS, NANCY
This class gives students an opportunity to investigate
time-based art. 4-D art draws on the vast and varied
traditions of theatre, dance, media, and music, often
crossing boundaries to create hybrid works. This
course will focus on concepts and processes related
to representing and experiencing events that take
place in time. Strategies for planning, proposing, and
producing work individually or collaboratively will
be discussed and practiced. Some class periods will
be workshop in style, and include physical and vocal
exercises and improvisations. The course will include
basic instruction and use of video cameras and sound
recording devices. A majority of the learning in this
studio course will happen as students make projects
and reflect on their work and the work of others.
Documentation and information about contemporary
and historic time-based art will be presented.
Students will be evaluated based on imaginative
exploration of ideas and materials, extent and depth of
work processes and research, completion of assigned
projects, and participation in class discussions.
Level: Introductory. Lab Fee $30.00. Class limit: 12.
Meets the following degree requirements: ADS

AD 1026 Introduction to Photography
WINER, JOSHUA
Photography is a common language spoken across
cultural, economic and geographical boundaries,
and used in news gathering, commerce and fine art.
Being able to use the camera as an effective tool for
self expression or in the pursuit of a documentary
project is a skill which is applicable to a large number
of COA students. A broad introduction to photography
and digital printing, this course will introduce the
principles and applied techniques of contemporary
photographic practices. Designed to put the student
in charge of their camera, we’ll begin with basic
camera controls such as aperture and shutter speed
and progress on to more advanced topics such as
the proper use of flash. Also covered will be an
introduction to Adobe Photoshop and/or Adobe
Lightroom as well as good printing practices in a
digital environment. Students will be evaluated on the
quality of finished prints included in a final portfolio,
their participation in class exercises and critiques, and
individual growth over the course of the term.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: none. Lab Fee: $110.
Class Limit: 13. Meets the following requirements: ADS

AD 1032 Introduction to Contemporary
Dance and Composition
ROBBINS, DANI
An introductory contemporary dance class with
focus on personal expression through movement
and compositional techniques. Beginning with an
awakening yoga warm-up, classes will explore the
body’s range of motion and exercise both long- and
short-term memory. Students will develop a basic
understanding of the craft of choreography, explore
various methods to create movement while gaining a
sense of their own aesthetic preferences. Over the 10week course, the group will collectively create a new
piece of choreography. Evaluation will be based on
demonstrated engagement with all course activities
and materials as well as successful completion of all
course assignments. Students of all levels welcome.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class limit:
12. Lab fee: $50

AD 1036 Figure Drawing
HILBERT, FRANCE
This course introduces students to the techniques,
methods, and history of the depiction of the human
figure through direct observational drawing. We will
be working from a live, nude model to investigate
structure, anatomy, and the expressive nature of
the human form through a variety of traditional
and contemporary approaches. Students will also
be trained to look at the figure abstractly through
careful consideration of negative space surrounding
the figure, siting parallel visual relationships across
the body, and by considering lines of gravity as a
horizontal and vertical axis for comparative analysis.
They will also develop a rudimentary understanding
of anatomy (artistically) through skeletal studies and
muscle groups while developing both traditional and
unconventional ways of seeing and drawing the figure.
Students will expand and refine their observational
skills, become proficient with a variety of drawing
media and understand how these concerns overlap
to create representational images. Understanding
the integration of formal elements of drawing and
how they are combined to achieve a sense of solidity,
proportion, gravity, and animation when representing
the human figure are our primary concern.
Evaluation will be based on active physical and verbal
participation in both work and in-class discussions
or critiques, an increased proficiency to accurately
represent the human form, individually designed
projects, and experimentation with drawing media.
A final digital portfolio of work and self-evaluation is
required.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

37

limit: 12. Lab fee: $100. Meets the following degree
requirements: ADS

wheel-thrown works are required, with reviews taking
place during week five and week 10.

AD 1038 History of Video Art

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: Permission of
instructor. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: $95. Meets the
following degree requirements: ADS

CAPERS, COLIN
Today, many use the words film and video
interchangeably. In fact, these words refer to different
mediums which evolved at different times, in different
circumstances, and whose languages and practices
originally developed around very different sets of
concerns and purposes. In what ways is the distinction
still useful in the digital age? This course will critically
interrogate the ways humans use moving images
to mediate our world, and the repercussions of
these uses on individuals, culture, and the contents/
subjects of the mediated messages. Many early video
artists sought to distinguish the medium from film in
that they wanted to create viewers who were active
participants rather than passive recipients. In this
class we will explore the political and self-expressive
impulses in video art, and trace its history from
1965—the year in which previously established artists
Andy Warhol and Nam June Paik first publically
exhibited video work—through to the current moment
when film is almost extinct and video has become
the world’s dominant moving image medium. We
will look at video art’s ties to performance art and
activism, and examine how many multi-media artists
have situated their use of video in the context of their
other practices. Artists whose work and writing about
their work will be explored include: Vito Acconci, John
Baldessari, Dara Birnbaum, Tony Conrad, Hermine
Freed, Joan Jonas, Miranda July, Mariko Mori, Bruce
Nauman, Pipilotti Rist, Bill Viola, and William Wegman.
We will also examine the role and work of artists’
collectives including Ant Farm, Broadside TV, Optic
Nerve, and Video Free America. Through secondary
sources we will look at the range of historical
methodologies and critical theories that have been
brought to bear on the works viewed. Evaluation will
be based on participation in class discussions and two
research papers. Students who come to class with
experience working in video will have the opportunity
to create their own original work in lieu of one of the
two papers.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class
limit: 18. Lab fee: $35. Meets the following degree
requirements: ADS

AD 1039 Ceramics I
MANN, ROCKY
This beginning course in ceramics will explore the
making of objects with clay by using the potter’s
wheel, slab roller, coils, and press molds. We will
explore surface design using slips, under glazes and
glazes, and patterns. Through these methods we
will incorporate wax resist, tape resist, plastic resist,
sgraffito, slip, and glaze trailing. Six hand-built and 20
38

AD 1044 Audio Production and Engineering
SOARES, ZACHARY
Producers and engineers paint an aural picture of the
work their clients wish to share with the world. This
introductory course focuses on the techniques of
producers as well as the engineering equipment used
to create recordings for musicians. Through recording,
editing, and mastering audio, students will learn to
create and record music and will better understand
the history of the recording and production process.
Topics that will be covered include digital and
analog audio equipment, transducers, condenser
and dynamic microphones, microphone placement,
signal processing, ProTools software, mixing,
effects processing, and interacting with clients. An
introduction to live sound reinforcement will give
context to the ProTools software. Weekend sessions
will provide hands-on experience recording demos
for local musicians while weekly listening sessions
and film screenings will highlight some recording
techniques used by producers and engineers over
the past 60 years. Students will be evaluated on their
participation during recording sessions, their input
during weekly listening sessions and screenings, and
their final projects.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: Permission of
instructor; no experience playing music or recording
audio is needed. Class limit: 8. Lab fee: $50

AD 1045 World Percussion
BENNETT, MICHAEL
Students will learn the fundamentals and rhythms of
West Africa, Cuba, and Brazil. In addition to having
a better understanding of the world of percussion,
students will master rhythmic notation, counting and
subdivision, time signature, and reading percussion
music. Students will work online in groups to compose
a percussion ensemble composition and will do a
research project on a percussion topic of their choice,
approved by the instructor. Students will take a
basic knowledge test of rhythms and instruments.
Evaluation will be based on ensemble composition
(33%), research project (33%), and final test (33%).
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None, but students
need to have a drum, preferably a djembe. Class
limit: 12. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree
requirements: ADS

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

AD 1051 Walking the Line: Introductory
Drawing
This course will introduce students to the
fundamentals of visual art in general and drawing,
in particular. While focusing on perception,
composition, line, and materiality, students will
draw from objects, the human figure, interior/
exterior spaces, and from imagined sources. We
will work with a variety of materials and challenge
the limits of scale by investigating the navigation
of landscapes as accumulative, drawn lines. We will
develop strategies to visualize histories, topographies,
individual perspectives, and inner worlds embedded
in landscape. Regular class critiques will assist in
developing evaluation skills of work in progress and
in analyzing formal composition principles. Assigned
readings and one research project, contextualizing
work and life of an assigned artist, will be a segment
of this course. Students will be expected to maintain
an active sketchbook. Students will be evaluated
based on class participation, competition of projects,
and their artist presentation.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class
limit: 12. Lab fee: $40. Meets the following degree
requirements: ADS

AD 1052 Cinematic Visions from
Marginalized Peoples
CAPERS, COLIN
Production modes, market concerns, and privilege of
access, in addition to the greater concerns of racism,
sexism, classism and other social biases, have all
historically contributed to the predominance of a
narrow range of cinematic voices being experienced
by most audiences. But from the dawn of cinema
there have been those working on the edges to realize
visions that speak to many modes of otherness and to
different manners of being, of belonging. In this class
we will investigate a range of diverse moving image
works and engage with texts that help contextualize
and elucidate the works and the creative impulses/
individuals behind them. The roster of movies viewed
this term will be chosen collaboratively from a curated
list by the group at the beginning of the term so as to
most effectively engage with the particular interests
of this configuration of students; choices include (but
are not limited to) films and videos made by and about
members of the following communities: LGBTQ+,
neurodiversity, seniors, economically disadvantaged,
homeless, people with disabilities, people of faith,
Inuit, Roma, Sami, Maya, Palawan, Amhara, African
diaspora, Indigenous peoples of the US and Australia.
Focus will be primarily on narrative forms, but some
works with experimental aspects may be featured.
Potential filmmakers include: Samira Makhmalbaf,
David Gulpilil, Cheryl Dunye, Tony Gatlif, Euzhan Palcy,
Haile Gerima, Mati Diop, Derek Jarman. Students
will be evaluated on their participation in class

discussions and on two papers written over the course
of the term. In these papers students will be asked
to demonstrate a balance between research into a
group of works of their choosing and exploration of
their own aesthetic and emotional responses to these
works.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class
limit: 16. Lab fee: $30. Meets the following degree
requirements: ADS

AD 1055 Kinetic Sculpture Introduction
TARDIE, HANNAH
Kinetic Sculpture Introduction uses the Arduino
microcontroller to explore light, sound, movement,
and interactivity as tools for art making. Students
will learn the basic principles of electronics and
their myriad sculptural applications. The course will
explore human and machinic sensing and how they
converge in kinetic sculpture. This is a studio course
that will be supplemented by lectures/presentations,
video, critiques, and readings. Grading criteria will
include craftsmanship, technical proficiency, aesthetic
sensibility, critical thinking, and overall effort. This is a
beginner-level class, no prior experience in electronics
is necessary.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class limit:
15. Lab fee: $50

AD 1056 Beginning Contemporary Dance
Technique
ROBBINS, DANI
In this introductory-level course, we’ll work to develop
a movement practice that centers both self-care
and togetherness. This class will draw on a variety
of contemporary practitioners and methods, relying
on somatosensory feedback to access availability,
spaciousness, presence, and pleasure, both
individually and collectively. Students will investigate
basic patterns of choreography, experimenting with
principles of velocity and momentum, and exploring
personal and shared movement impulses. Assigned
readings, screenings, and writing assignments will
complement and support our physical practice.
Students will be evaluated based on attendance,
successful completion of assigned work, depth of
engagement during class and with course materials,
and the expansion of their individual movement
capacities. All class meetings will take place in person
and on campus. Participants of diverse abilities,
needs, and backgrounds are encouraged to enroll.
Dance experience is welcomed, but not necessary.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class limit:
12. Lab fee: None

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

39

AD 1057 Performance and Ecology: What
Can Theater Do?
MENDEZ, KHRISTIAN E
Using Carl Lavery’s question for the performing
arts as a starting point, this course investigates
live performance’s historical and contemporary
engagement with ecological concerns. Our course
will begin by establishing a common language for
discussing theatre. We will then explore a range of
international performance, while learning about the
contexts (environmental, cultural, and institutional)
that influence their development, production,
and reception. We will focus our attention on the
interaction between narrative, embodied, and
material elements within these performances while
reading sections from texts in literary ecocriticism,
performance studies, theatre history, environmental
history, and anthropology. If in person, there will be
one fieldtrip mid-semester. Key questions will include:
How might the body of a performer complicate the
distinction between “environment” and “society?”
What are the means by which we can categorize a play
or a production as “ecological?” What are the specific
affective narratives embedded within environmentalist
discourse and how might performance interrupt or
complicate those? What might have performance
already done for the environment? Course goals are
to refine our skill set for analyzing the relationship
between scientific facts and narrative, a better sense
of the impact that live performance can have on
the various communities where it takes place, and a
sharper framework for engaging an audience with
questions regarding the “natural” world. Major works
will likely include: Manuela Infante’s Estado Vegetal;
the Rude Mechanicals’ Not Every Mountain; Rolling
Ryot’s Rainforest Reverb; Anne Washburn’s Mr.
Burns, a Post-Electric Play; Chantal Bilodeau’s Sila;
Grupo Sotzil’s Uk’u’x Ulew; William Shakespeare’s The
Tempest and The Winter’s Tale; Adam R. Burnett’s
Mammoth: A De-extinction Love Story; Animal Facts
Club’s Gulf of Maine; Art At Work MAINEUSA’s Blessing
of the Creatures; Shawna Dempsey & Lorri Millan’s
Lesbian National Parks and Services. Students will be
evaluated through eight weekly responses, a mid-term
performance-and-production analysis exercise, and a
final project of their choosing.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: Some interest
and/or previous coursework in art history, dramatic
literature, literature, performance analysis is
recommended but not required. Class limit: 12. Lab
fee: $85

AD 1058 Dissecting Popular Music
HENDERSON, JONATHAN
Can you trace the anatomy of a catchy song? How
does the form and structure of music compare
across culture and style? How does sound recording
dramatize a song on the sonic stage of headphones,
40

night club sound systems, and car stereos? This
practice-based course focuses on strengthening
critical listening and musicianship skills, as students
learn to dissect recorded performances of popular
music across divergent music genres. We will split
our time between the classroom and the rehearsal
studio, engaging in critical listening, discussion, and
hands-on musical performance. This course is open
to practiced musicians as well as beginners with an
interest in singing, instrumental performance, or
sound recording. In our weekly classroom sessions,
students will develop critical listening skills, including
hearing component parts of a sound mix (identifying
instruments, voices, and their placement in the
stereo field), identifying frequencies, recognizing
the use of processing effects, describing song form
and arrangement techniques, etc. Students will
work to articulate what they value about recorded
performances through written reflections and
presentations in class. In the rehearsal studio, we will
dissect the instrumental and vocal parts of several
pieces of music to understand how the components
conspire to create an overall effect. The class will also
experiment with group composition, working to write
a few pieces of music together towards the end of the
term. For a final project, students will create a short
podcast-essay that dissects a recorded performance
of their choosing. Evaluation will be based on class
participation, completion of written reflections, the
final project, and class presentations.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class
limit: 12. Lab fee: $30. Meets the following degree
requirements: ADS

AD 1059 Fundamentals of Sculpting:
Sculpting the Head
HILBERT, FRANCE
This course will incorporate modeling with clay, figure
drawing, and understanding of human anatomy.
Students will be introduced to the visual language:
line, form, texture, value, color, and the understanding
of a solid mass in space. They will study individual
features in clay, learn the basics of the human
figure, proportions, anatomical structure, and how
it constitutes a whole. Students will be challenged
to make decisions as they work to express their
perspective and personal interpretation, culminating
in a life-size portrait in clay. This class will also involve
sketching from a live model, drawing the full forms,
learning about movement, volume, and composition.
Evaluation will be based on completion of projects,
participation in class, individual and group critiques.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class
limit: 12. Lab fee: $100. Meets the following degree
requirements: ADS

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

AD 1060 Movement Training Basics

AD 1062 Architecture in the Expanded Field

BAKER, JODI

LOCK, TIMOTHY

This course is an introduction to a wide variety
of physical skills useful for anyone interested in
investigating their own potential for physical research
and self-expression. Techniques are derived from
movement training methodologies developed for
actors as well as other practices including (but not
limited to) classical ballet, martial arts, circus skills,
sports training, acrobatics, and improvisation.
Students gain a greater sense of physical awareness
and imaginative possibility, building strength, mental
and physical agility, stamina, and flexibility while
grappling with questions regarding personal and
collective responsibility, personal and collective
consen,t and the power/politics of a specific body in
a given space or circumstance. The class works to
challenge preconceptions about body image and body
language while working creatively and collaboratively
to clarify abstract concepts through physical action.
Evaluation is based on class participation (including
labs/screenings and small group rehearsals),
engagement with the course blog (including all
introduced topics and concepts), and successful
completion and presentation of a short sequence of
assigned projects. Students with any or no movement
experience are welcome.

Architecture, as an artistic pursuit within the context
of art history and theory, has occupied a unique niche
between the cultural, societal, and ecological context
driving our practical and physical reality. As they
grapple with these factors, the dominant modes of
theory within the discipline have shifted over time,
constantly changing architectural canon, style, form,
and tectonics in response. The past decade has seen
significant advances in technology and practices of
sustainability directly affecting architectural practice.
We are now faced with ecological and socioeconomic
crises that incremental improvements to the built
environments and ecologies cannot address. This
course seeks to reestablish a basis of architectural
design approach that synthesizes these challenges.
Through hands-on studio design problems, case
study presentations of precedent material, readings
in art and architectural literature and theory, and
site visits to realized architectural projects, this
course will provide a general introduction to the
practice of architectural design viewed through
the lens of historic artistic response to societal,
ecological, and cultural needs. Students will develop
a base understanding of the discipline, while being
introduced to architectural representation techniques
and the tools used for architectural design and to
assess building performance. In doing so, we will
center our work around four key design factors
actively changing the built environment and practice:
context, function, performance, and identity. Students
will be evaluated based on class participation, timely
submission of accomplished projects, and their artist
presentation.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class limit:
10. Lab fee: $40. Default grading option: Credit/No
Credit. Meets the following degree requirements: ADS

AD 1061 Sourcing the Body: Experiential
Anatomy
ROBBINS, DANI
In this course, we will work towards an embodied
understanding of our own anatomy, as well as
a deepened sense of listening, presence, and
understanding of the body as a complex system.
Students will explore anatomical models and be
led through simple, gentle movement sequences.
These exercises will be drawn from various somatic
modalities such as Mind-Body Centering, Feldenkrais
Technique, and Alexander Technique. Students will
be asked to reflect on these explorations in a journal
format, and will curate a small portion of this work
to share with the class on a weekly basis. Readings,
additional viewings, and drawing assignments will
complement our weekly lessons. This course is
recommended for performers looking to deepen their
relationship to their instrument, as well as students
with a strong science background who are interested
in additional perspectives on anatomical study.
Through consistent discussion of this work and our
experiences in it, we will work to place the experiential
in dialogue with the empirical.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class limit:
15. Lab fee: None

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class limit:
12. Lab fee: $100

AD 1063 The History of Making Prints
EARLEY, ANNIKA LOUISE
In this seminar, we will cover the history of
printmaking. Rather than take a chronological
approach to print history, the seminar examines
four broad themes surrounding historical and
contemporary printmaking: prints and politics;
printmaking as a process; the appropriated image; and
collaboration/participation. These themes encompass
a breadth of artists, works, and time periods. The
ideas presented and discussed in this seminar provide
a context and a ground for the student to more clearly
define their own creative practice and relationship
to the history of printed art forms. Readings, writing
assignments, and at-home projects challenge
students to critically position themselves, as well as
the practice of print in general, within the broader
scope of visual culture. It also assists in developing a
habit of research, and understanding that it can be an
essential part of the creative process. Assessment will

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

41

be based on evidence that the student has completed
assignments and readings, and, active and meaningful
participation in seminar discussions.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class limit:
15. Lab fee: None

AD 1065 Contemporary Dance Composition
ROBBINS, DANI
This introductory course will focus on personal
expression through movement and compositional
techniques. Each class will begin with a gentle
warm up that will help students become aware of
movement impulses and locate a personal movement
vocabulary. Through short, weekly assignments,
students will gather a collection of tools for
composing movement sequences including honing
improvisation toward set choreography, responding
to spatial and environmental conditions, and drawing
inspiration from sound and imagery. Our making
will be supplemented by readings and screenings of
20th and 21st century choreographers, aiding us in
contextualizing our creative process within the current
field of contemporary dance. Students will be asked to
craft a short final piece of choreography, to be shared
with the community during a works-in-progress
showing. Evaluation will be based on attendance,
satisfactory completion of weekly assignments, and
rigorous engagement with the process of developing
a final piece. Students of diverse abilities and
experiences are encouraged to enroll. It is strongly
recommended that students have some prior dance or
theater coursework before taking this course. Please
contact the instructor directly if you have questions
about your background.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class limit:
12. Lab fee: None

AD 1066 Introduction to Painting
BEACH, DESMOND
This course aims to familiarize students with the
foundational principles and techniques of painting.
Students will gain knowledge of painting tools,
fundamental color mixing, composition, form, and
spatial relationships through diverse activities.
Students will engage with various subjects, including
still life, interiors, abstraction, and self-portraiture,
while questioning the canon and debating the
discipline’s ability to embrace other voices or
perspectives. In this class, acrylic will be the primary
medium. However, we will also explore other nonpainting materials. Evaluation will be based on
painting projects and participation in class discussions
and critiques.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class limit:
12. Lab fee: $80

42

AD 1067 Music Fundamentals: Intro to
Reading/Hearing/Writing/Playing
REMY, MICHAEL
This hands-on course deals with the aural, mental,
and physical elements of music and its production. It
is divided into instructional segments including: ear
training and aural perception, music theory, basic
keyboard skills, arranging and composition, and
basic guitar skills [Detailed descriptions of segments
available in registrar’s office]. This course is open to
all students, regardless of musical experience. The
sole prerequisite is a desire to make music or simply
to enrich one’s skills as a critical listener of music.
Efforts are made to accommodate the special needs
of the musical novice, as well as to challenge the
experienced performer. Emphasis is on popular song
styles, but analysis of Western art music forms are
included for comparison purposes.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class limit:
12. Lab fee $20

AD 2011 Graphic Design Studio I: Visual
Communication
COLBERT, DRU
Visual communication is one of the most pervasive
means of human communication. Graphic design,
within the realm of visual communication, is a process
used to effectively convey ideas and information
visually through print, electronic media, products in
the marketplace, and structural elements in the built
environment. Its application may be promotional,
editorial, informational, expositional, or instigational.
It may cater to, or critique commercialism, colonialism,
capitalism, and advertising—or alternately be used to
organize information and visualize complex data or
concepts. Is it possible to construct a visual message
that will be received through the din and noise of our
overstuffed media environment, past other competing
messages? What are some of the contemporary issues
surrounding design and the roles and responsibilities
of graphic designers in the workplace and in their
communities?
In this introductory/intermediate-level studio course
you will become familiar with visual rhetoric and the
basic elements, principles, and processes of graphic
design that will help you to construct effective visual
messages. You will work on a variety of conceptual
visual communication projects in the realms of
information design, editorial design, and promotional
design. Lectures, demonstrations, assignments,
and critiques will offer a balanced framework for
developing skills in creative perception, critical
thinking, and visual communication. An emphasis
is placed on these elements and evaluation will be
weighted more heavily in these areas than technical
expertise on the computer. You will, however, be
required to learn the basics of several computer

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

graphic applications (Adobe Photoshop, Adobe
Illustrator, and Adobe InDesign and/or Quark) in
order to complete coursework. You will receive basic
instruction in these programs in class, but will be
expected to refer to computer manuals and guide
books for specific tools and techniques that may be
required to visualize your ideas.

totems, pictorial painting, to sequential engraved
prints, comic books, graphic novels, graffiti, and the
web. In this studio course, students will investigate
visual language, symbolism, and some of the pictorial
devices, materials, and techniques employed by artists
to tell stories visually—particularly through sequential
composition in the graphic arts.

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites:
Introduction to Arts and Design or Two Dimensional
Design I recommended. Class limit: 14. Lab fee: $85.
Meets the following degree requirements: ADS

Through focused assignments, discussion of
artists’ works (historic and across cultures), and
guided demonstrations in a variety of materials
and techniques, students will respond to select
historic forms of visual narrative to create unique
contemporary forms in which to tell their own relevant
stories. Case study studio projects will be selected
to focus on key points in world history that mark
technological transition in material, technique, and
pictorial devices employed by artists to render visual
narratives. Projects will range from the hands-on
exploration of ancient wall painting and low relief
carving technique, through non-press printing
techniques such as linocut, image transfer, and
potato prints, to collage of found images, xerography,
Polaroid print manipulation, digital prints, and
“synthetic” imaging on the computer. Students will
be encouraged to explore and invent new forms of
sequential composition and utilize new or previously
unexplored materials or techniques. Concurrent
investigations in visual studies will focus on the
meaning created through the use of pictorial devices,
signs and symbols, and the creation of narrative
structure through repeated image/duplication,
sequential composition, and visual allegory. Students
will be evaluated on writing assignments, level
of completion and analysis of assigned readings,
research and presentation, quality and completion
of projects, and participation in class activities and
discussion. There are no prerequisites, however,
the following courses are recommended: Intro to
Arts and Design, or 2D courses in drawing, painting,
printmaking, or graphic design, photography, or
writing and/or literature courses.

AD 2012 3D Studio: Introduction to ThreeDimensional Art and Design
COLBERT, DRU
This course is an introduction to three-dimensional
design and sculpture. Through a variety of projects
students will analyze and apply the classic organizing
principles of three-dimensional design work. Elements
of form, space, line, texture, light, color, scale,
and time (including sound, sensory perceptions,
movement and natural processes) will be explored—
with attention paid to how a work functions, involves a
viewer, activates a space, or impacts an environment,
physically, psychically, or socially. Projects in the
class will progress from the creation of objects to
investigations of the sensory and objective aspects
of space. Students will experiment with subtractive
and constructive processes using traditional as well
as contemporary materials such as found, recycled,
and natural objects. A diverse range of materials and
techniques will be introduced and demonstrated.
Discussion of historic and contemporary artists’ work
will augment the course. Students will be evaluated
based on completion of projects, participation in class
discussions, and individual/group critiques.
Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Class limit: 15. Lab
Fee $85. Meets the following degree requirements:
ADS

AD 2013 Constructing Visual Narrative
COLBERT, DRU
Narrative: n. & adj. N. a spoken or written account
of connected events in order of happening. The
practice or art of narration. Adj. in the form of, or
concerned with, narration (narrative verse). How
is meaning shaped by the images we create? In all
cultures, throughout time, artists have sought ways
to tell stories about far ranging topics—the unknown,
the success of a hunt, gods and goddesses, historical
events, wars, court tales, biblical themes, social
instruction, morals, politics, product promotion,
and personal imaginings. Historically, artists have
adapted visual storytelling techniques to exploit
evolving technology and changing social concerns,
from ancient wall markings, tomb inscriptions, scrolls,
illuminated manuscripts, pottery decoration, carved

Level: Introductory/intermediate. Prerequisites: none.
Class Limit: 15. Lab Fee: $85. Meets the following
degree requirements: ADS

AD 2014 Curiosity and Wonder: Design and
Interpretation in the Museum
COLBERT, DRU
From “cabinet of curiosity” to “exploratorium,”
this studio course surveys contemporary museum
activities and methods of communication through
visual display, space, and interaction. Students will
engage in a project development process to refine
“big ideas,” determine educational goals, and learn
techniques to design and build their projects. Class
participants will gain an understanding of factors
that influence learning, media, and modes that may
be utilized to communicate complex content, and how

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

43

meaning is constructed by the selection, organization,
and layering of intellectual material through the use of
object, text, image, and experiential devices.
Projects and hands-on workshops will provide an
opportunity to gain skills and techniques in visualizing
ideas by developing concepts in the form of plans,
sketches, models, and narrative description. Students
will have an opportunity to evaluate and create
interpretive material for the College of the Atlantic
George B. Dorr Natural History Museum. Students will
be evaluated through participation in class discussion
and critiques, attendance, and for completion
and quality of assigned projects. This course is
appropriate for all students interested in informal
education in the museum environment, design, and
visual communication.
Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisite: One
or more courses in Arts and Design OR Educational
Studies. Class limit: 15. Lab Fee: $85. Meets the
following degree requirements: ADS

AD 2017 Drawing Mineral and Botanical
Matter in the Forest of Maine
CLINGER, CATHERINE
Viewed as a regular practice, the descriptive power of
drawing can intensify the experience of observational
fieldwork, provide the draughtsperson with a richer
understanding of the cycles within a landscape, and
deepen our relationship with the natural world. The
primary setting for this studio course is Mount Desert
Island. The subject matter of our visual attention
includes trees, rock features, and other indigenous
plant life of the island. Students will learn a variety
of drawing methods in order to document the natural
history of a specific place. Coursework includes:
maintaining a field sketchbook, graphically recording
the development of a singular botanical life form over
the course of the term, and producing visual notations
in the sketchbook during a bi-weekly slide lecture on
the history of artistic representations of the natural
world. Evaluation is based on class participation,
evidence of completion of weekly assignments, and
final project.
Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites:
Permission of instructor. Lab fee: $120. Class limit: 12.
Meets the following degree requirements: ADS

AD 2020 History of Photography
WINER, JOSHUA
This introductory course charts the history of
photography from early 19th century nascent
technologies (daguerreotypes and tintypes) through
to the diverse range of photographic media currently
practiced by contemporary artists and photographers
(film and digital). In this art history course, we will
consider how the new visual discourse of photography
was informed by both technological and social
44

developments. Photography cannot be defined as a
unified medium; therefore, this course investigates
both discontinuous as well as coalesced conventions
within its own history; in other words, how and
why photographs look different from each other.
In addition to noting external influences upon the
photographic object, we will explore how photography
helped to shape a variety of visual disciplines from
painting to zines. Accordingly, our class will discuss
formal photographic syntax (how they are composed
and the forms they appear represent) and allied
aesthetic practices as well as the wider social and
political issues that influenced the content of its visual
culture. We will study how artists use photographic
practices in the context of social and activist functions
to examine a diversity of subjects—gender and class,
and ethnic and national identity, among others—and
how categorical distinctions between mass culture
and avant-garde art, and commercial and fine art
photography are not always stable. Course readings
include writings by historians, artists, and critics
that reflect the unstable status of the photographic
object within the intersections of science, technology
and culture, aesthetic discourse, and everyday
documentation. We will look at many photographs.
Students will be evaluated on their participation in
class discussions, short essay assignments, and a final
project or paper.
Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: none.
Class Limit: 15. Lab Fee: $30. Meets the following
degree requirements: HY, ADS

AD 2022 Film Theory
CAPERS, COLIN
How do motion pictures express ideas? Why do we
respond to them in the ways we do? Film theorists
have approached these questions from contexts as
diverse as formal composition (sound, mise-en-scene,
color, cinematography, and editing), signs and symbols
(semiotics), cultural and/or gender concerns, and
psychoanalysis. In this class, we will practice using
these and other theories to understand and analyze
moving pictures. Each week we will screen one or two
feature length movies as well as a number of short
films. Screenings will be complemented by source
texts from critics, theorists, artists/filmmakers, and
cinephiles. Students may choose to take this course
as writing intensive; those who do will be required
to write and revise three or four critical response
essays based in analytical frameworks covered in
the course. All students will be required to complete
a final research paper and presentation. Students
should expect to spend 7-9 hours a week in class
meetings, labs and screenings (in addition to writing
and research). Students will be evaluated on papers,
final project, and participation in discussions. Writing
Focus option.
Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites:

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

Previous art class recommended. Class limit: 12. Lab
fee: $35. Meets the following degree requirements:
ADS

AD 2029 Contemporary Artist as
Researcher and Activist
CLINGER, CATHERINE
The student will be introduced to a contemporary
stream of visual culture that places nature, ethos,
competing ideologies, and our relationship to
these within the context of emergent forms of art
activism. In response to environmental and social
crisis, theory and praxis figure significantly in the
work of artists and artist collectives from around
the globe whose practice manifests as socially
engaged art as defined by Pablo Helguera; data/
information reimagined as by Mona Hatoum and
Trevor Paglen; or examinations of reconciliation and
mass trauma in the work of Doris Salcedo and Kara
Walker. In some cases, artworks engage with nature/
culture by their placement in site-specific locations,
through new modes of picturing, and/or through the
appropriation of hypothetical scientific musings or
emerging technologies (e.g., Ed Atkins, fictionalized
genetic hybridization and subversion of surveillance
tools). Many of the artists we examine make use of
new tools designed for industrial purpose, medical,
agricultural, or scientific research. Others further
participatory dialogues within antiracist, decolonizing,
and queer-centred discursive practices. This work is
inherently transdisciplinary and human ecological in
disposition and character. Many of these producerartists appropriate the role of researcher in order to
bring attention to ecologies that human beings have
disrupted or will disrupt. Doris Salcedo, Tacita Dean,
Kara Walker, Mark Dion, Shirin Neshat, Ai Weiwei,
Andra Ursuta, Karim Ben Khelifa, Raven Chacon,
Frances Alys, Natalie Jeremijenko, Guillermo Galindo,
among others, will be considered. Evaluation is
based on class participation, evidence of completion
of weekly readings, a final paper, and a class
presentation.
Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites:
none. Lab fee: $50. Class limit: 15. Meets the following
degree requirements: ADS, HY

AD 2035 Our Band Could Be Your Life:
Music, Art, Zines 1975-2015
MAHONEY, DANIEL
This course is an investigation of how we consume
and are consumed by music. Topics include youth
and subcultures of music, power and identity, the
politics of location, and fan cultures. We will listen to
punk rock, hip hop, riot grrrl, shoegaze, noise, psych,
death metal, doom drone, post rock, grindcore, and
pop (among others); we will analyze visual artists
who come to represent musical movements (such as

Raymond Pettibon & Winston Smith, Fab 5 Freddy &
Cey Adams) and we will read socio-cultural criticism of
the times and places from which these artists sprang
(Joan Didion, Steve Waksman, Theodor Adorno, Tobi
Vale, Kathleen Hanna, and Kevin Young). The class will
explore analogue artifacts from the 70s, 80s, & 90s
(posters, zines, fine art, videos) and compare them to
digital artifacts found today on the internet. Students
are required to attend all weekly film screenings and
sound sessions. Evaluations will be based on regular
critical responses, a final project, and participation in
discussion and class activities.
Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None.
Class limit: 15. Lab fee: None

AD 2036 Critical Making and New Media Art
KARRIEM, QURAN
This is a course for critically engaging with technology
through making and theory. Starting from Marshall
McLuhan’s seminal analysis of the ways media
configure the human sensorium, we will build
on sound and moving image to explore the ways
computation operates on levels above or beyond
human perception. We will draw from new media art,
politics, and media theory to engage with technology
by focusing on computation as media, medium, and
material for artistic production and critique. Through
readings, in-class projects, and semester-long critical
making projects, we will engage with the history
and practice of critical making with a focus on the
production of generative new media projects using
the software program Max/MSP. Beginning with an
overview of media theoretical concepts like mediation,
representation, image, embodiment and information,
the course will focus on discourses relevant to new
media practice today, including algorithms, race,
platforms, and artificial intelligence. The aim of this
course is to develop a critical technical practice that
takes seriously the politics embedded within our
contemporary media systems by focusing on the ways
computation is interwoven into everyday experience.
Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: Some
programming and/or artmaking experience is helpful,
but not required. Class limit: 15. Lab fee: $60

AD 3012 Documentary Video Studio
ANDREWS, NANCY
A documentary video or film purports to present
factual information about the world. A documentary
may take a stand, state an opinion, or advocate a
solution to a problem. A documentary may function
in the realm of art. Documentaries may compile
images from archival sources, interview testimonies
about social movements or events, record an ongoing
event as it happens, or synthesize these and other
techniques. We will look at various documentaries
both historic and contemporary, and a number

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

45

of strategies and styles, including; video diaries/
autobiographical works, cinema verite, propaganda,
documentary activism, nature documentaries,
and experimental genres. Students will learn the
basics of video production, including using a video
camera, video editing, production planning, lighting,
microphone use, and interview techniques. Students
will make several documentary projects, both
collaboratively and individually. Students will be
evaluated on their participation in group discussions
and critiques, and on the documentary projects they
produce.
Level: Intermediate. Prerequisite: Any introductorylevel arts and design studio course or film history
course (previous video production experience is not
required). Lab fee: $30. Class limit: 12. Meets the
following degree requirements: ADS

radio shows, music, and experimental forms. Labs
will focus on understanding the nature of sound and
practical application of sound equipment, technique
and theory. Students will learn about microphones,
sound recording, amplification, and the physics of
sound. The course will culminate in a performance
to the community of student presentations that
expresses the wide use of sound as part of our
culture. Evaluation will be based on class participation
and a set of assignments, including a final project.
Emphasis will be placed on an artistic interpretation
of soundscape, although students will be expected to
have a basic understanding of the scientific basis of
acoustic phenomena.
Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: One AD and one
ES course. Class Limit: 12. Lab fee $60. Meets the
following degree requirements: ADS

AD 3013 Animation

AD 3015 Art of the Puppet

ANDREWS, NANCY

ANDREWS, NANCY

This course explores animation as a form of creative
expression, experimentation and personal vision.
Various techniques, such as drawing, cut-out,
painting on film, and under-the-camera collage, will
be introduced. Students will create flip books, video
pencil tests and animated films. Students will be
given exercises and assignments that guide them
through processes for making art. Various artists’
animated films will be screened and discussed.
History and concepts related to animation and film
will be introduced through screenings, readings, and
discussions.

Puppetry is the art of designing, constructing, and
operating puppets, usually for an audience. A puppet
is an articulated figure controlled by external means.
Puppets have been used for entertainment, education,
therapy, spectacles and social/political demonstration.
This course will explore the construction and use of
puppets, investigate the theory, history and practice
of puppetry, and seek out the role and potential of
puppets. Various types of puppets will be made,
including hand puppets, rod puppets, shadow puppets,
and large scale puppets. Students, individually and in
collaboration, will create both original and adapted
scripts and scenarios for their puppets, exploring
relationships between text, story, character, and
movement of the puppet. In addition to live work,
students may choose to develop puppets for use
within film, video, or multimedia projects. The
course will include readings on puppetry, screenings,
presentations, demonstrations, and group discussions.
Students will be evaluated on 1) participation in
class discussions and exercises, 2) quality and effort
demonstrated through projects/presentations and, 3)
understanding and study of readings and screenings
as demonstrated in discussions and projects.

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisite: previous
introductory art course. Lab fee: $95. Class Limit: 12.
Meets the following degree requirements: ADS

AD 3014 Soundscape
ANDREWS, NANCY; TODD, SEAN
Soundscape may be defined as an environment of
sound (or sonic environment) with emphasis on the
way it is perceived and understood by the individual,
or by a society. It thus depends upon the relationship
between the individual and any such environment.
The term may refer to actual environments, or to
abstract constructions such as musical compositions
and tape montages, particularly when considered
as an artificial environment. In this interdisciplinary
course we investigate a broad range of acoustic
concepts, ranging from a scientific treatment of
the nature and behavior of sound both in air and
underwater, the biology of hearing, the use of sound
by animals in communication, and the cultural
applications of sound and music in human society.
Students will explore methods of composition using
sounds as materials for assigned projects. Various
approaches to understanding and experiencing
sound will be examined, including spoken word,

46

Level: Intermediate. Recommended pre-requisite: At
least one of the following: Intro to Art and Design, 2-D
Design Studio, 3-D Design, Performance Art or The
Sculptural Object in Performance. Class limit: 12. Lab
fee $60. Meets the following degree requirements:
ADS

AD 3017 Dramatic Writing for Stage and
Screen
LEPICO, ANDREA
This is an intermediate creative writing course for
students interested in writing for theater, film and
television. We will read published and unpublished
COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

plays, screenplays and tv shows from up-and-coming
writers currently off and on Broadway and in film/
television, as well as selected plays and screenplays/
shows from the cannon based on student interest.
Playwrights (and screenwriters), like cartwrights
and shipwrights, are all skilled builders of vehicles
meant to move people from one place to another. We
will explore dramatic structure from the perspective
of the audience. Whether writing linear narratives,
collage or non-linear plays and films, there is a rhythm
to dramatic writing that can be studied. We will make
a conscious study of form to free us to write what we
are driven to write. Through reading, analysis, and
writing, we will investigate the dramatic elements of
character, conflict, language, and theme. The course
will include practical writing exercises to motivate and
progress the writing from first draft through revision
to rehearsal draft. Students will be encouraged to
develop productive writer habits and self-discipline.
Class time will be divided between hearing students’
work and discussing work we’ve read. We will develop
our listening skills when hearing our own and
colleagues’ work. We will explore the role of critique
in new script development and refine a process that
works for us. Students will be expected to bring new
pages in to each class building to a complete first draft
of a full-length play or screenplay (of any length) by
the end of the course. Evaluation will be based on the
student’s dedication to developing a writing practice
as well as the submitted script. We will conclude with
a reading series to give each student the opportunity
to hear their work in front of an invited audience.
Evaluation is based on the quality of student’s written
work and participation in class discussion.
Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: Permission of
instructor. Class Size: 12. Lab fee: None

AD 3018 History of Filmmaking II
(1946-Present)
CAPERS, COLIN
D. W. Griffith, pioneer of early cinema, prophesied
in 1924 that by 2024 cinema would have been
instrumental in, “eliminating from the face of the
civilized world all armed conflict.” Where have things
gone wrong? Cinema is a powerful medium that in
many ways is still struggling to find its place among
the other arts; there are many promising byways that
have been overlooked or under-explored. This course
explores the histories, production and meanings of
motion pictures. Using various films as case studies,
we will look at the development of film forms,
techniques, and genres from 1946 to the present—
the second half of cinema history. Films studied
will include examples of narrative, documentary,
animation, and the avant-garde. Students will learn
concepts of film analysis and criticism, and will
have opportunities to practice critical skills in class
discussions and in research and writing assignments.
Evaluation will be based on attendance, participation

in class discussion, written papers, and research
presentations. Film gives us the opportunity to, in the
words of David Lynch, “get lost in another world...
to dream in the dark.” Who decides which dreams we
will see? Through an understanding of where cinema
has been we can more effectively shape its, and our,
future. Writing Focus option.
Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: None. Class
limit: 20. Lab fee: $35. Meets the following degree
requirements: ADS, HY

AD 3020 American Dreaming: Theatre and
Activism in the US
BAKER, JODI
The course focuses on dramatic literature connected
to historically relevant political and social issues in
the US. Students will read plays and study a variety
of artists that have used theatre as a viable force
for change over the last century. Together we’ll
explore the mechanics and dynamics of particular
performances as well as the cultural context in which
these works were conceived. We will investigate
significant periods in American history such as
the New Deal, the House Un-American Activities
Committee, the Civil Rights Movement, the emergence
of the AIDS epidemic, the attack on the World Trade
Center, and the economic crash of 2007-08—and
we will explore the impact of these events on
this particular form. Research will include Circuit
Chautauqua, Pat Chappelle, Hallie Flanagan and The
Federal Theatre Project, Susan Glaspell, Clifford
Odetts, Arthur Miller, Lorraine Hansberry, The Living
Theatre, The Open Theatre, Adrienne Kennedy, Marie
Irene Fornes, The Wooster Group, Anna DeavereSmith, Luis Valdez, Tony Kushner, Suzan-Lori Parks,
Young Jean Lee, Brandon Jacob Jenkins, The
TEAM, Radiohole, and more. Evaluation is based
on full participation in class discussion, successful
completion of all short projects and assignments, and
a major final project/paper.
Level: Intermediate. Pre-requisite: Successful
completion of the writing requirement and at least
one literature course. Course limit: 12. Lab fee: $75.
Meets the following degree requirements: ADS, HY

AD 3025 Special Topics in Production
BAKER, JODI
This course provides practical experience in the
processes required to build a theatrical production.
Because each rendition of the class focuses on
new source material, new production methods and
concepts, students may receive credit for this course
multiple times. Students research, rehearse, and
produce a performance for the public in collaboration
with a faculty director. The material and pedagogical
focus of the course changes with each successive
rendition. The number of students enrolled in the

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

47

course varies depending upon the demands of
the project. Students with any or no experience in
theater are welcome but priority is based on seniority
and/or specific academic investment in the given
project, process, or subject matter. In most cases, all
assignments (cast and crew) will be made the previous
term, through auditions and interviews. Those
interested in non-actor aspects of production (set
design, light and sound design, stage management,
dramaturgy, etc.) are especially encouraged. The
course meets four days a week and those enrolled
must be available for a certain amount of additional
collaborative work outside class time (extra
rehearsals, construction and tech work, plus final
performance dates and strike). A production schedule
will be available by week one. Evaluation is based on
demonstrated commitment to the process as well as a
final reflective paper based on the experience. Default
grading option is Credit/No Credit.

styles from salsa to hip-hop, funk, reggae and more.
We will explore the intersecting work of artists
(such as Janelle Monae, Angélique Kidjo, Fela Kuti,
Lee “Scratch” Perry, and Bob Marley) and scholars
(such as Paul Gilroy, Angela Davis, Amiri Baraka, and
Michael Veal). Equal weight in the course will be given
to reading, listening, and writing as valuable modes
of interacting with music. Throughout the course of
the term, students will learn to listen more closely to
sound and to develop a critical capacity for relating
these sounds to the political and social worlds from
which they emerge. Turning our attention back and
forth between the local and the transnational, Black
Atlantic Music is a window into how music takes shape
in the context of culture, politics, geography and
history. Evaluations will be based on regular written
responses, a final project, and participation in class
discussions and activities.

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: None. Class
Limit: 12. Lab fee: $75. Meets the following degree
requirements: ADS

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: None, but previous
coursework in anthropology, literature, or history will
be helpful. Class limit: 15. Lab fee: None. Meets the
following degree requirements: ADS

AD 3032 Intermediate Ceramics

AD 3078 Native American Drama

MANN, ROCKY

MENDEZ, KHRISTIAN E

This is a ceramics course for students with
intermediate levels of skill. This course will focus on
hand building, clay slab construction, and advanced
throwing techniques. A basic level of skill on the
potters wheel is required. Glazing and decorating
processes, alternative firing techniques, and ceramic
technology will be introduced, as well as artistic
concepts and design principles relevant to artistic
expression in the ceramic medium. Historical
and contemporary ceramic works and artists will
be studied. Students will be evaluated on class
attendance, participation, completion of assignments,
and sketch book entries.

This course will be a fast and broad exploration of
the presentation of Native American identities and
communities through performance. We will study
a series of representations of indigeneity through
embodied performance on stage and in public spaces.
Our analytical frameworks will be dramatic theory,
performance studies, and Native theatre studies.
This course will better equip students to understand
how manipulating the image of the “Indian” through
performance contributes to, resists, and complicates
colonial erasure and the settler logic. The geographic
scope of the course is focused on Native American
communities within the United States, but we
will occasionally draw from artists based in other
territories. Key questions we will engage with are:
by what means have Native American communities
been represented and performed in US history? What
does it mean to represent ourselves and others? What
circumstances do artists, activists, and scholars need
to consider when making and analyzing performance
in the aftermath of colonialism? What are the ties
between artistic self-representation by Native and
Indigenous peoples and larger political movements
towards self-determination? What might the study of
US Native American drama enrich our understanding
of contemporary American society? Artists and
artworks studied may include: Spiderwoman Theater’s
Sun, Moon and Feather, Reverb -ber-ber-ations;
Muriel Miguel’s (Kuna Rappahannock)’s Hot’n’Soft;
Mary Kathryn Nagle’s (Cherokee) Manahatta; Larissa
FastHorse’s (Sicangu-Lakota) What Would Crazy Horse
Do, The Thanksgiving Play; Kent Monkman / Miss
Chief Eagle Testickle’s (Cree) Casualties of Modernity,
Taxonomies of the European Male, Another Feather

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: Ceramics I, a
similar course in another college or high school, or
permission of instructor. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: $95.
Meets the following degree requirements: ADS

AD 3077 Black Atlantic Music
HENDERSON, JONATHAN
In Black Atlantic Music students will work to
understand how histories of slavery, colonialism,
diasporic imagination, and networks of cultural
exchange form the basis for popular music in the
African diaspora. Tracing musical and political
histories through a series of case studies routed
throughout the diaspora, this course aims to develop
a theory of “the Black Atlantic” as a sonic geography.
After establishing a foundation in the key historical
forces leading to the creation of the African diaspora,
students will explore case studies related to the
development of local and transnational musical

48

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

in Her Bonnet; Hanay Geiogamah’s (Kiowa-Delaware)
Body Indian, Land Sale; Lynn Riggs’ (Cherokee)
Green Grow the Lilacs, The Cherokee Night; Coco
Fusco and Guillermo Gomez-Peña’s Couple in The
Cage: Two Undiscovered Amerindians Visit the West;
Marie Clements’s Burning Vision; Molly Spotted Elk
(Penobscot); Ty DeFoe (Ojibwe and Oneida); Maria
Thereza Alves, Groundwater Arts, Branden JacobsJenkins’ An Octoroon, Les Freres Corbusier’s Bloody
Bloody Andrew Jackson, Suzan Lori-Parks’ Venus,
Double Edge Theater’s Ohkehteau. Assessment will
include written or otherwise documented script
and performance analysis, a photo collage midterm
project, and a final project of the student’s choice.
The course will be conducted in English, but students
will have the option to complete written coursework in
Spanish after consultation with the instructor.
Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: Previous
coursework in Native American Studies and at least
one prior course in literature, theatre, or visual arts is
recommended. Class Limit: 15. Lab fee: $65

AD 3079 Jazz Manouche
HENDERSON, JONATHAN
During the 1930s, the French-Romani guitarist Django
Reinhardt launched a new musical style. Combining
the traditional music of his Romani heritage with
French bal-musettes and the swing music storming
Europe from the other side of the Atlantic, Reinhardt
pioneered a sound that came to be known as “gypsy
jazz,” “jazz Manouche” or “hot club jazz.” This class
will focus on the rich musical repertoire flowing from
this history as we work to practice, perform, and
learn about its sounds and histories. A practice-based
course organized around learning and performing
the music, it will treat a series of compositions
as entry points for lessons in jazz improvisation,
understanding harmonic motion, chord voicing, and
rhythmic awareness (swing, waltz, bossa, bolero,
etc.). In addition to practice-based work, students
will also learn about the histories of Romani (Sinti)
migration across Europe and the genealogies of
musicians as they relate to the development of jazz
Manouche. Students will read texts concerning Django
Reinhardt and other key figures and will write a final
paper that reflects research into the people, places,
and sounds associated with this music. Assessment
will be based on class participation, weekly practice
logs, and the final paper/project. The course is
designed for students with a working knowledge of an
acoustic instrument (guitar, strings, bass, percussion,
accordion, mandolin, woodwinds, brass, percussion,
etc.). The class will be held largely outdoors, so we
cannot accommodate piano or electric instruments.
Permission of instructor is required to ensure a
workable balance of instruments.
Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: Permission of
instructor and working knowledge of an instrument.

Class limit: 12. Lab fee: None. Meets the following
degree requirements: ADS

AD 3080 Intermediate Projects in
Photography
WINER, JOSHUA
In this intermediate level course, students will explore
at least three distinct working methods for making
a small body of work. Through demonstrations
and subsequent linked assignments, students will
explore the figure and portrait, still life tabletop,
and one other topic to be decided by the group.
After completing the three modules, students will
have time to complete a final project in the style
and method of their choosing. Critiques, readings,
and research will help build a visual and intellectual
vocabulary to explain and explore these personal
projects. The primary goal of this course is for each
student to make a meaningful body of work in their
own style that could be ready to hang in a gallery. We
will be spending considerable time in class editing
and printing. Students should expect to spend
considerable time outside of class making pictures.
Self-motivation, the ability to collaborate on an idea
or image, and being on time will all be expected. Some
prior experience with Adobe Lightroom Classic or
Photoshop is highly recommended. Students will be
evaluated on their progress towards their goals, and
participation in discussions and critiques; pass/fail
grade encouraged. In order to register for this course,
students must have previously taken Introduction to
Photography. If you have not taken Introduction to
Photography, but have equivalent experience, please
contact the instructor directly for permission to add
the course.
Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: Intro to
Photography or equivalent or permission of instructor.
Class limit: 12. Lab fee: $100. Meets the following
degree requirements: ADS

AD 3081 Craft Ecologies: Mount Desert
Island
DOWNING, E. SAFFRONIA
Through the course Craft Ecologies, students will
trace the complex systems which bring material into
being. Exploring the natural substances of Mount
Desert Island, students will harvest raw materials,
think through material as an extension of place,
and create process-based artworks. In this studio
seminar, we will consider the correspondence between
maker and material. Wild clay, natural pigments, and
foraged fibers will enter contemporary art discourse
as students explore entanglements between the
natural and human-built worlds. Coursework will
include a term-long, self-designed project related
to course themes. We will also undertake weekly
reading assignments such as Robin Wall Kimmerer’s

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

49

Braiding Sweetgrass, Ursula Le Guin’s Carrier Bag
Theory of Fiction, and Tim Ingold’s Making. Students
will be evaluated based on their participation in class
discussions and critiques, as well as their inventiveness
and demonstrated effort in ceramic assignments.
Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: At least one arts
and design studio course in any discipline. Class limit:
12. Lab fee: $30

AD 4013 Activating Spaces: Installation Art
COLBERT, DRU
“Space in active dialogue with the things and people it
contains...” — RoseLee Golberg, from Space as Praxis.
Installation art is one of the most original, vigorous,
and fertile forms of contemporary art. It often
involves working in specific non-art sites where
the activation of the place, or context, of artistic
intervention is concerned not only with art and its
boundaries, but also with the fusion of art and life.
Installation art extends the area of practice from the
studio to public space. Architects, urban planners,
and environmental designers consider similar formal
and social aspects of space in the creation of city
plans, buildings, and public spaces. Through hands-on
projects and a survey of historic and contemporary
art and design work, this intermediate level 3D studio
course offers an opportunity to explore formal
aspects and social contexts of space and time as a
medium for making art.
Students will create interior and exterior installations
that may incorporate sculptural elements, everyday
objects, light, sound, or other devices. Course work
will investigate the objective and subjective qualities
of space, material, and form, and the meanings
created through their juxtaposition. In addition to
studio work, we will survey a variety of historic and
contemporary contextual art works including: spaces
laid out by architects and designers, installation
itself as an art form, public art projects, sacred
spaces, the work of visionary artists, historic sites,
and monuments. Students will be evaluated on their
participation in class activities and critiques, their
timely completion of projects, and attendance.
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: 3D
studio classes in art, architecture, environmental
design, performance art, or signature of instructor.
Class limit: 10. Lab fee: $75. Meets the following
degree requirements: ADS

AD 4014 Graphic Design Studio II: Digital
Projects
COLBERT, DRU
This studio course offers students an opportunity for
in-depth study of contemporary issues, applications
and techniques in graphic design. Students will
pursue conceptual problem solving through creative
exercises and theoretical and applied studio projects.
50

Particular emphasis will be placed on advancing skills
in creative problem-solving, typography, layout, image
generation and preparing art for print. Digital and
hands-on methods (techniques such as block print) for
image generation will be explored to create original
illustrations. Projects will include typography and
illustration exercises, identity design, environmental
design and interpretive information design. Students
will be encouraged to solicit a design project from
the local community and produce it in the context of
the class by engaging in the creative process from
concept to production oversight during the course
of the 10-week term. In addition to structured class
assignments, students will have an opportunity to
propose and pursue their own design projects. This
class will be conducted in seminar/studio format.
Emphasis will be placed on the design process—from
creation to production, the timely completion of
project phases, creative solutions, and advancing
skill in typography, layout, and image generation. The
detailed schedule will depend largely on the course
makeup and individual project proposals.
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites:
Signature of Instructor, Graphic Design Studio 1. Class
limit: 12. Lab fee: $85. Meets the following degree
requirements: ADS

AD 4016 The Wilderness in Landscape Art I:
Proto-Ecological Visions
CLINGER, CATHERINE
This course is concerned with the visualization
of what is wild in the landscape and how artists
pictured that which others saw as untamed. Course
readings will engage with a variety of texts written
by art historians, geographers, historians, writers,
and theoreticians that address the invention of the
modern idea of wilderness. Assumptions governing
what constitutes wilderness and how artists have
shaped our perception of it are among topics which
we will consider. Landscapes contain life that seems
to fluctuate between haggard or feral states of
nature. We will investigate how an artist distinguishes
between that which is cultivated and that which is
natural; what images evoke nostalgia for a lost past
or suggest the preference for a human dominance
over those origins we have isolated ourselves from.
Students will examine visual evidence in the fine arts
that indicates a growing awareness of the effect of
the Industrial Revolution in North America and in
Europe. Although we look at ecologies through the
eyes of artists, students interested in science, history,
and literature are encouraged to take the course.
Evaluation will be based on a research paper and class
presentation. There will be a class trip to view art and/
or sites relevant to our discussion.
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Permission of
instructor required. Lab fee: $50. Class limit: 12. Meets
the following degree requirements: ADS, HY
COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

AD 4018 Movement Training Basics II
BAKER, JODI
Building on skills introduced in Movement Training
Basics, students will continue investigating their
physical potential and deepening their understanding
of the movement theory and languages covered.
Techniques will be derived from classical ballet,
martial arts, acrobatics, improvisation, circus skill,s
and more. The work will promote a greater sense
of physical awareness and imaginative possibility.
Advanced students will build strength, mental and
physical stamina, and flexibility. Students will translate
the work into a variety of practical applications and
performance pieces based on a series of exercises and
prompts. Evaluation is based on class participation
and engagement with introduced topics and concepts.
Default grading option is Credit/No Credit.
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: Previous
completion of the basics course and/or significant
movement training or dance experience is required.
Course limit: 15. Lab fee: $20. Meets the following
degree requirements: ADS

AD 4019 Studio Printmaking
CLINGER, CATHERINE
Printmaking is the process of transferring an image
from one surface to another. A print mirrors the
surface whence it came and also performs as a
reflection of the physical and/or immaterial realms of
objects and ideas. Representing concepts clearly in
any medium requires an artist to engage in thoughtful
collaboration with materials in order to realize the
potential of form as a means of expression. This studio
course will explore ways to address this aesthetic
challenge through printmaking. Students will acquire
basic skills as printmakers with an emphasis on relief
(woodcut and linocut) and intaglio (line etching,
engraving and aquatint) techniques. They will also
develop a broad understanding of the history of
prints and how they have functioned to communicate,
document, and transmit information through images
on paper. Students will be evaluated on their projects,
participation in critiques, level of engagement with
materials, ability to work in a collaborative studio, and
final project.
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisite:
Permission of the instructor, Introduction to Arts and
Design, and a drawing class. Class limit: 10. Lab fee:
$200. Meets the following degree requirements: ADS

AD 4020 Object and Performance
BAKER, JODI; ANDREWS, NANCY
Objects have long been significant elements in
ritual, dance, theatre and performance art; they
might be props, body extensions, idols, and avatars.
Taught in a workshop format, this course will
explore a variety of techniques from traditional

theatre arts, as well as sculptural ideas that can be
integrated into performance. Goals will be to gain a
deeper understanding of the power of objects in a
performative context; to experiment with a variety
of building techniques; to practice, create and
refine personal and found objects as art; to explore
an object’s potential to spark narrative, illustrate
relationship dynamics, and fuel theatrical action.
We’ll also study the use of objects in connection with
certain forms of performance training and creative
collaboration strategies. The course will provide an
historic context of objects in performance and will
utilize improvisational exercises, personal writing,
movement, and bodywork. Class topics may include:
relationship, scale, sound, duration, repetition,
archetype, and viewer participation/performance.
Evaluation will be based on attendance, participation
in all group projects, in-class assignments and
discussions, demonstrated understanding and
mastery of basic skills through the creation of
projects, timely completion of all assignments and
readings, and effective participation in class critiques.
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites:
Movement Training (I or II) or 3D studio, and
permission of either instructor. Class limit: 12. Lab fee:
$50. Meets the following degree requirements: ADS

AD 4034 Actor Training II
BAKER, JODI
This course is an intermediate/advanced level scene
study course. Each iteration of the course examines
the works of either a single playwright or a single
play. The writer and the work are researched through
performance practice. The class examines the text(s)
dramaturgically while developing strategies for
performing the work effectively for contemporary
audiences. The vast majority of our class time will
be spent learning, staging, and presenting key
monologues and scenes from the play(s) for critique
and continued revision. Students will also gain a clear
understanding of the historical and political context
in which the work was written and together determine
if or how it has maintained contemporary relevance.
Besides reading the play(s) themselves and screening
examples of the work in production, students will
likely read related theory, criticism, interviews, essays
and articles by or about the playwright. Evaluation is
based on participation in class activities, readings and
discussion, successful completion of all performance
projects including productive rehearsal time both alone
and in groups, a portfolio of written responses, and
demonstrated engagement with a shared class blog.
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: Prereqs
(if any) will be determined in connection to the
specific subject matter. This info will be shared with
students via email before the registration period.
Class limit: 12. Lab fee: $40. Meets the following
degree requirements: ADS

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

51

AD 4035 Improvisation in Music

timeliness and quality of work, and thoughtful
participation in class discussion and critique.

BLOTNICK, RYAN
This hands-on theory/performance course for singers,
instrumentalists, guitarists, pianists, drummers, etc.,
deals with improvisation, a spontaneous exchange
or interplay of musical ideas and moods. It offers
the musician the opportunity to utilize his/her
technical ability to its fullest extent while enjoying
the creative freedom of spontaneous composition.
The class addresses technical and aesthetic aspects
of improvisation in all styles of music (jazz, rock,
blues, classical, folk, etc.), including the elements
of melodic development, melodic cliches, rhythmic
and melodic embellishment, harmonic substitutions,
and development of the ear. It is multilevel in format,
allowing for students of all technical proficiency to
participate. In short, this course enables students to
use the tools of improvisation to be able to make a
personal musical statement while playing, singing,
jamming, etc.
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: None.
Class limit: 12. Lab fee: $20

AD 5014 Graphic Attack: Advanced Graphic
Design Studio II
MENDEZ, KHRISTIAN E
The name of this course, Graphic Attack, refers
not only to the power of image and text within our
visually saturated physical and virtual environments,
but to the need to evaluate and respond critically to
mass media. Students will explore and discuss the
roles and responsibilities of designers as primary
crafters of visual messages through promotion,
advertising and identity design, and investigate the
work of artists and designers who appropriate tools
of advertising to construct alternative messages
outside of, and often in critique of, the commercial
realm.
This advanced-level studio art course combines
critical examination of contemporary graphic design
practice with studio projects in creative problem
solving. Practice in design research, layout and
composition, typography, digital imaging, and text/
image composition will be combined with hands-on
studio projects in image generation such as block
print, silkscreen, monoprint, instant photography,
xerography, and collage techniques.
Projects will range from investigations of
personal identity and branding to advertising and
package design in the retail and socio-political
environments. Through studio visits, students will
have an opportunity to meet professional artists
and designers to discuss first hand process and
ethical issues related to their work. Students will
be evaluated on conceptual problem-solving ability,
effectiveness of design solutions, understanding
and practice of the incremental process of design,

52

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: Signature of
instructor, Graphic Design Studio I. Class limit: 12. Lab
Fee: $85 Meets the following degree requirements:
ADS

AD 5017 Animation II
ANDREWS, NANCY
The class further develops ideas, skills, and animation
projects through a mix of in-class projects/demos/skill
based activities, readings, discussions, screenings,
presentations, and individual meetings with the
instructor. Students will write a production plan that
will serve as an outline of each student’s project(s) for
the term. The instructor will provide useful activities,
information, resources, critiques, and guidance.
A schedule of presentations of student works-inprogress will be created. Readings will address
ideas and theories related to animation studies
and processes. Advanced animation techniques
may include camera work and sound design. Work
completed over the term may be a single longer
animation or a series of animated shorts depending
on the student’s preference and animation goals. All
students will be expected to produce advanced level
work and encouraged to experiment and push their
work to the highest level. Students will be evaluated
on their projects, participation in critiques and
discussions, and overall level of engagement with the
course material and class.
Level: Advanced. Pre-requisite: Animation, signature
of instructor. Class size: 12. Lab fee: $80. Meets the
following degree requirements: ADS

AD 5023 Romanticism: The Triumph of the
Imagination over Reason?
CLINGER, CATHERINE
Scholar Isaiah Berlin considered Romanticism to
be, “the greatest single shift in the consciousness
of the West.” This advanced course will consider
the diverse body of Romantic art through thematic
enquiry, case studies, critical and historical analysis.
Divergent aesthetic ideologies in Romantic Art will
be examined in relationship to both major trends
and minor currents of intellectual thought during
the period 1780-1840 in Europe, with an emphasis
placed largely on German Romanticism. Taken
together, many of the literary and philosophical texts
associated with the movement have been understood
as fundamental critiques of rationality; however, it
is the less celebrated illustrations found in scientific
treatises and works of art not acknowledged in the
canon of the visual arts, as well as images embedded
in various forms of printed matter, which effectually
capsize Enlightenment aesthetic theories and provide
impetus to the development of Realism. Although the
COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

body of scholarly work that studies the interstices
of Romantic art, literature, and music is enormous,
the course will narrow the scope by focusing on
certain works as sites of a particular pictorial kind
of representational transdisciplinarity. The course
proposes that the widespread interconnectedness
within the fine and popular arts, through aesthetic
and material production, inform the conceptualization
of Romantic imagery. Excellent evaluations will based
on a high level of class participation, a consistent
demonstration of the close reading of assigned texts,
and a commitment to generous listening during group
discussions—along with timely submission of two short
essays and a final research paper.
Level: Advanced. Prerequisites: A minimum of one
history, anthropology, or literature course and
permission of instructor. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: $30.
Meets the following degree requirements: ADS, HY

AD 5025 Strangers and Performance
BAKER, JODI
This course explores the dynamics of stranger
interactions across disciplines and in a variety of
contexts, first by gaining a basic understanding of
how the topic has been considered by scientists,
social theorists, architects, and city planners over
the last century but also by understanding how these
particular social dynamics fundamentally connect
to work in theatre and in art. Through a series of
practical experiments, students discern when, why,
and how stranger interactions are meaningful, how
they differ in urban and rural contexts, and how
that meaning is tied to the shared work ethic at the
heart of the theatrical contract. We will consider the
politics of public and private spaces as well as key
strategies in staging urban centers, national parks,
schools, museums, and theatres. We’ll also examine
stranger archetypes and related terminology like
mob rule, groupthink, bystander effect, and collective
consent. Students will explore the inherent risks and
rewards that stem from personal interactions with
strangers and they will study existing and emerging
art, performance, and technology projects that
attempt to incite these interactions. Students will also
develop their own ideas for public performance and
new theatre technology. Readings will likely include
work from Kio Stark, Paul Auster and Sophie Calle,
Bertolt Brecht, Peter Brook, Roland Barthes, William
H. Whyte, George Simmel, Anne Bogart, Susan Sontag,
Jorge Luis Borges. Visual, theatre, and performance
artists may include Andrew Schneider, Richard
Renaldi, Natalia Koliada and Nicolai Khalezin, Marina
Abramovic, Chris Burden, Rotozaza, Mammalian
Diving Reflex, and Complex Movements. The course
requires a large amount of off-campus work and at
least one weekend field trip. Evaluation will be based
on consistent engagement with course topics and
the class blog, successful completion of a series of
solo and collaborative fieldwork assignments, and a

comprehensive final project w/process essay.
Level: Advanced. Prerequisites: This course is by
permission only. Previous coursework in theatre and
movement, art history, design and social theory is
strongly encouraged. A written expression of interest
in the course is required. Class limit: 10. Lab fee: $150.
Meets the following requirements: ADS

AD 5032 Advanced Studio Printmaking
CLINGER, CATHERINE
This art studio course is a continuation of the
introductory course Studio Printmaking. A print
mirrors the surface of its matrix and presents a
reflection of the physical and/or immaterial realms
of objects and ideas. Representing concepts clearly
in any medium requires an artist to engage in
thoughtful collaboration with materials in order
to realize the potential of form as a means of
expression. This advanced studio course will explore
ways to address this aesthetic challenge through
printmaking by experimenting with conventional and
non-traditional ways of creating a range of matrices.
Students will acquire skills as printmakers with an
emphasis on multiple-plate, collagraph, and other
advanced techniques. Students will develop a deeper
understanding of the history of prints; how they have
functioned to communicate, document, and transmit
information through images on paper—engaging with
more complex discourses of representation. Students
will be evaluated on their projects, participation in
critiques, level of engagement with materials, ability
to work in a collaborative studio, and final project.
Level: Advanced. Prerequisites: Studio Printmaking
and at least one drawing class; permission of
instructor. Class limit: 8. Lab fee: $150. Meets the
following degree requirements: ADS

AD 5033 Making Art: Effort, Resilience,
Persistence
ANDREWS, NANCY
In this advanced art practicum and seminar, students
will pursue the development of a body of art work
or series of art works. Through practice, critique,
discussion, readings, and interactions with artists and
those involved in supporting and presenting artists,
students will gain a better understanding of art as
an ongoing pursuit, beyond classes and assignments.
What does it take to maintain and fertilize a long-term
project or a life’s work? How can a creative process
be carried on, maintained and sustained? The primary
goal of this course is for each student to develop
their art practice, better understand their creative
processes, and show evidence of these developments.
This course is an excellent lead-up to a senior project
in the arts. Students may work in any medium, but
should already have the basic skills required for their
chosen project(s)/body of work. This course requires

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

53

significant dedication outside of class to make
artworks. Students are expected to possess and/or
extend their ability to be self-directed and motivated.
Students will be evaluated on their progress towards
their goals and participation in discussions and
critiques; pass/fail grade encouraged.

with Caique Vidal, a Brazilian percussionist who will
visit the class (virtually) on a few occasions to offer
perspective and insights drawn from his experience
with the music. Alongside rehearsal and performance,
students will study the history of samba music in
Brazil. We will read Barbara Browning’s Samba:
Resistance in Motion and also discuss what the
music’s recontextualization to a college campus in
Maine might mean for its performers and listeners.
The class will include a weekend field trip to the
HONK! festival in Boston. Student assessment will
be based on rehearsal attendance, class discussion
participation, reading response journals, and a final
group presentation.

Level: Advanced. Prerequisites: multiple previous
art classes and permission of instructor. Class
limit: 12. Lab fee: $80. Meets the following degree
requirements: ADS

AD 6029 Musicianship
HENDERSON, JONATHAN
Interested in learning about music theory? Want
to learn how to better explain your songs to other
musicians? Hoping to return to an instrumental
practice that you have neglected lately, or to
begin studying a new instrument? Have a group of
musicians looking to take your performance practice
to the next level? Musicianship is an applied theorypractice course for students interested in developing
their skills as instrumentalists, composers, vocalists,
songwriters, beatmakers, or sound designers.
Students will work independently (or in small groups)
to create and implement a syllabus that reflects
their specific music-learning goals. Throughout
the term, students will meet with the professor
for weekly tutorials as they progress toward those
goals. Bi-weekly, full group workshops will focus on
key lessons in musicianship: applied music theory,
rhythmic awareness, song analysis, music production,
etc. Students are welcome to sign up individually
or in groups (e.g., a string quartet, a songwriting
partnership, or a band would be welcome to sign
up together). A final project will be determined in
consultation with the professor. A contract grading
agreement will be written between the student
and instructor at the beginning of the term. At the
term’s close, students will write a self-assessment
letter reflecting on how successfully they progressed
towards their learning goals. Each student (or small
group) will need to write a clear proposal of what they
intend to focus on. Please write Jonathan an email
outlining your proposed project to gain permission to
join the class. Level: Variable, Introductory through
Advanced. Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 12. Lab Fee:
None. Meets the following degree requirements: ADS

Level: Variable, Introductory through Advanced.
Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 16. Lab Fee: $100.
Meets the following degree requirements: ADS

EDUCATIONAL
STUDIES
ED 1010 Experiential Education
TAI, BONNIE
Even before John Dewey published Experience
and Education in 1938, experiential education had
been practiced in various forms around the world.
This course explores the philosophy of experiential
education and its diverse practices in the realms of
adventure education, service learning, workplace
learning, environmental education, museum
education, and school reform. Group activities and
fieldtrips will provide opportunities to participate
as both learner and teacher in a variety of teacherled and student-designed experiences. The final
project involves researching an existing experiential
education program, its philosophy, and its practices.
Evaluation is based on class and fieldtrip participation
(including one multi-day fieldtrip), reflective logs,
curriculum design, service-learning journal, an oral
presentation of the service-learning, and a final
essay that articulates a philosophy of experience in
education.
Level: Introductory. Offered every other year. Lab
fee: $100. Class limit: 15. Meets the following degree
requirements: HS, ED

AD 6030 Samba Percussion Ensemble
HENDERSON, JONATHAN

ED 1011 Children’s Literature

Samba is one of music’s great spectacles—loud,
coordinated, precise, and kinetic. The music is
equally at home on the stage and in the street. All are
welcome to participate in COA’s samba percussion
ensemble. The individual percussion parts range in
complexity so the music suits a wide range of skills
and levels of experience. The musical repertoire
for the ensemble will be developed in coordination

SWEENEY, MERYL

54

This course is a broad overview of children’s literature
and its place in the elementary school classroom.
It examines the range and trends in literature for
children that includes all genres, prominent authors,
illustrators, awards, critical evaluation, and integration
into instruction across the curriculum. Students
participate in and design lessons which incorporate
COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

or extend children’s response to literature. They
survey poetry and media appropriate for elementary
students. Students read an extensive amount of
children’s literature, keep a response journal, develop
an author study, and create a teaching unit using
children’s literature.
Level: Introductory. Class limit: 15. Meets the following
degree requirements: ED

ED 1013 Changing Schools, Changing
Society
TAI, BONNIE
How have schools changed and how should
schools change to ensure “the good life?” This
interdisciplinary, team-taught course examines the
potential and limits of a human-ecological education
as an instrument of enlightened progress and lasting
positive social, cultural, and environmental change.
It explores three essential questions about education
and its relationship to human development and social
progress. Looking at the role of formal educational
institutions and their relationship to government and
other social institutions: What is the role of schools
in development and social change? Considering the
role of teachers as agents of change: What is the
role of the teacher in school/organizational change
and community development? And finally, reflecting
on our subjective motives for working in the field of
education: Why do you want to become an educator?
Through course activities such as service-learning in
schools and group project work on a contemporary
educational phenomenon (e.g., school choice, new
technologies for learning, single-sex education),
students will learn how educational policy at the
federal, state, and local levels impacts teaching
and learning, investigate the moral dimensions of
the teacher-student relationship, and reflect on
the construct of teacher-learners. Students will
be introduced to a variety of educational research
methods (i.e, ethnography, case study, quasiexperimental, correlational) that will allow for critical
analysis of the knowledge base that strives to impact
educational policy and practice. Evaluation will be
based on participation, reflective writing, service
learning, and group projects and presentations.
Level: Introductory. Class limit: 15. Offered every
other year. Lab fee: $20. Meets the following degree
requirements: HS, ED

ED 1014 Child Development
ALEX, JOANNE
How does a child think? What causes them to learn?
What teaching approaches work best with young
children? These questions and more will be explored
through readings, lectures, field observations, and
planned class activities. This course will provide an
introduction to early childhood education (preschool

to eighth grade). Theorists such as Piaget, Vygotsky,
Montessori, Gardner, Erikson, Maslow, Kohlberg,
and Gilligan will be used to examine the physical,
mental, emotional, moral, and social aspects of
childhood growth and development. Students will
explore a range of curriculum models, approaches,
and strategies as they learn to apply developmental
theory to best practices. These best practices will
include the role of teachers in creating meaningful
learning experiences and classroom environments
(curriculum), documenting learning, assessment,
inclusion, and family involvement. The primary
modes of instruction for this class will be lectures,
classroom discussions, field observations/reflections,
and cooperative hands-on learning activities. Short
reflective papers, an observational journal, and class
projects will be used to assess learning.
Level: Introductory. Class limit: 15. Meets the following
degree requirements: ED

ED 1015 Educational Innovation
FULLER, LINDA
Given the rapid pace of change in communications,
career opportunities, learning options, and the
global economy, US schools are struggling to adapt.
As technology, culture, politics, and media facilitate
new and more diverse means of learning, how are
educators adjusting to “new” learners from toddlers
through senior adults? Driving questions include: Who
is leading innovation and where? What are some of the
ways educators are experimenting with teaching? How
are innovators changing the purposes of schools? Who
is currently starting schools and why? How is brain
research impacting innovation within and outside of
public schools? How are digital natives, eco-warriors,
and the call for global literacy accommodated in
mainstream schools? If public schools, as some
charge, have outlived their usefulness: what next for
education?
With the objective of exploring and understanding
innovative ideas for classrooms, school design, and
district structures, as well as alternative places
and means of learning, we will work toward a more
comprehensive understanding of what is new, and
potentially revolutionary, in schools and in education
beyond schooling. Evaluation will be based on class
participation (including leading a discussion around
a particular area of individual interest), a series of
four reaction papers, and both live and virtual “field”
explorations of innovative practices and organizations.
The final project will be based on the design and
proposal of an innovative educational option.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class Limit:
15. Lab Fee: $10

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

55

ED 1016 Introduction to Adolescent
Psychology
HILL, KENNETH
This course focuses on the segment of the human life
span from puberty to early adulthood. In this class
we will examine the physical, cognitive, social, and
moral aspects of adolescent growth and development.
Issues to be considered include adolescent
relationships (peers, family, romantic), adolescent
issues (identity formation, at risk behavior, schooling,
and stereotypes), and critical reflection on one’s
own adolescent experience. The main objectives of
this course are to: 1) provide students with a working
knowledge of the theories of psychology which pertain
to early adolescent development; 2) help students
develop the ability to critically analyze information
and common assumptions about the development
of adolescents; 3) consider contemporary issues
and concerns of the field; and 4) to afford students
the opportunity to explore their own adolescent
development. Course work entails lecture, discussion,
extensive case analysis, and a field component.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisite: None. Class limit: 16.
Meets the following degree requirements: HS, ED

ED 1017 Young Adult Literature
RYAN, SIOBHAN
Students will learn about the history of and current
trends in Young Adult Literature. Young adult
literature is one of the strongest areas of publishing
in the United States. For example, in 2014 The Fault
in Our Stars was the best selling print and ebook
work in America. Exposure to young adult literature
will allow pre-service teachers to have an overview
of current titles that can be used in or out of class,
while students not interested in teaching will have
opportunities to stretch their reading and writing
canon. Assignments will include reading both
academic and trade books as well as articles. Students
will learn through a variety of methods from class
discussion to preparing class lectures. They will be
in touch with professional young adult writers, and
they will also have choice in a term-long project that
will be done throughout the trimester. Evaluation
is on a continual basis as the course is structured
to allow students to demonstrate growth over the
course of the trimester. There will be rubrics for class
participation and assignments, and students will
complete self-evaluations.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class limit:
12. Lab fee: $10

ED 1019 Advocacy and Education for English
Learners
CHIEN, MING-TSO
Cultural and linguistic diversity in the classroom is
becoming increasingly prevalent around the world.
56

In the United States, for example, approximately 10
percent of all students in public schools are English
learners (ELs), i.e., students who are in the process
of acquiring English as an additional language. ELs
enjoy valuable opportunities with their additional
set of cultural and linguistic resources, but they
may also face discrimination as a result of racism,
linguicism, and/or xenophobia. These forms of
discrimination, along with other systemic barriers,
can negatively affect ELs’ academic achievement and
sense of belonging in their schools and communities.
This course, based on a framework of culturally
and linguistically responsive pedagogy, has two
overarching goals. First, it aims to equip aspiring
educators with the tools to recognize and respond
to bias and inequity in the education of ELs. Second,
it aims to introduce these future educators to the
fundamental principles and techniques for teaching
and advocating for culturally and linguistically diverse
students. Human ecologists planning to work as
educators in the school or the communities to serve
ELs and their family will find this course helpful.
Students who take this course will learn through
active and critical engagements with readings
and audio-visual materials, whole-class and group
discussions, reflective and analytical writings, lesson
planning, micro-teaching, and project planning. They
will be evaluated through weekly responses to course
materials as well as individual and team projectbased assignments, such as interviews with ELs or
current EL educators, advocacy projects targeting
issues affecting ELs, and outreach initiatives that
build partnerships and/or enhance cross-cultural
understanding.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class limit:
15. Lab fee: None

ED 1022 Learning in the Arts through
Exploration
SHUTT, CAROL
In this course, students will explore teaching and
learning in the arts as a process of exploration,
personal expression, and nurturance. This process,
one of discovery, begins without preconceived
expectations of outcomes and allows for response
and reflection through the artmaking. This approach
will be explored as a means of teaching art to others,
while also adding to one’s own creativity and artistic
growth. Students will work with the elements and
principles of design, using a variety of techniques and
materials (drawing, painting, collage) to understand
and teach the art process. We will create some shared
work in class, such as narrative memory maps and
contour-drawn portraits, in order to experience
the art process in collaboration. Students will also
explore the ecology and economy of altering found
materials for artmaking, as well as investigate creative
ways to use text and writing in art (Exquisite Corpse,
Allen Ginsberg’s American Sentences, Black-Out

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

Poetry.) Relevant artists’ writings and work will be
read and discussed in class. Evaluation will be based
on attendance, participation, class activities, and
completed assignments. Assignments will include: coleading discussions of class readings, ongoing work in
personal sketchbooks, responses and creative writing
exercises in journals, and altering an old book (we’ll
use discarded library books) to create a source book
of techniques for teaching and making art.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class limit:
12. Lab fee: None

ED 2010 Disability Rights in Education
RABASCA, ADAM
Across the country, varying state regulations and
practices call into question the manner with which
students with disabilities are taught, served, and
prepared for the future in an economically and socially
challenging community and environment. Their rights
are governed by the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, the
Americans with Disabilities Act, and the Individuals
with Disabilities Education Act. Course participants
will learn how students with disabilities are ensured
their rights to access and a free appropriate public
education as well as how this translates into postsecondary education, employment, and society.
Students will be evaluated on synthesis of information
in written format and in visual presentation and on
in-class, mutli-modal engagement. Students will also
be expected to complete an independent research
project evaluating the manner in which disability
rights are ensured within the very community and
environment in which we live.
Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None.
Class Limit: 15. Lab fee: None

ED 2011 Equity and Social Justice in
Education
CHIEN, MING-TSO
In this course, students will be introduced to the
fundamental concepts related to educational equity
and social justice. They will examine how power,
privilege and oppression operate across and/or at
the intersection of social identities grounded in the
following topic areas: poverty and socioeconomic
status, gender identity and expression, (dis)ability,
race, as well as sexual orientation. To that end,
students will engage in in-depth exploration of their
social identities and check their own prejudice.
Concurrently, they will practice skills that allow them
to recognize and respond to identity-based biases
within educational contexts and work towards creating
and sustaining equitable and inclusive learning
environments for all learners, but especially for those
coming from the marginalized communities. Every
week, students will read texts that introduce key
concepts in one of the above-mentioned topic areas.

They will also practice analyzing cases that depict
scenarios of bias and inequity in education, using the
Equity Literacy Framework. In addition to their peers,
students will also engage in weekly conversations
and discussions with guest speakers from diverse
educational communities, such as K-12 schools,
higher education institutions, educational community
organizations, etc. Evaluation will be based on the
following: an autoethnographic portfolio that consists
of the artifacts each student produces throughout
the term while exploring their own social identities as
well as a reflection paper; a review of a book in one of
the above-mentioned topic areas; and a final project
where students work in groups to create digital
resource guides that educators can use to address
social justice issues with their learners.
Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: An
introductory course in educational or social sciences
recommended. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: $20

ED 3010 Understanding and Managing
Group Dynamics
TAI, BONNIE
This course will examine essential questions
about how groups function, whether the group is
a committee involved in institutional governance,
a class of adolescents, or a cohort of business
colleagues. Readings, activities, and assignments
will weigh traditional and alternative conceptions of
leadership, power, authority, community, diversity,
membership, and exclusion. Students will engage in
case discussions, writing (including autobiography
and creative writing), and research activities. A major
component of the course will be the observation and
analysis of a group (e.g., in a community organization,
business, or school). The final paper will be the
creation and analysis of a case. Evaluation will be
based on class participation, responses to readings,
facilitation of a case discussion, an autobiographical
essay, a short story, reports of observations, and
the final paper. Students will be expected to take the
course Pass/Fail, with special arrangement to be made
for those needing to take it for a grade.
Level: Intermediate. Class limit: 15. Lab fee: $50. Meets
the following degree requirements: HS, ED

ED 3012 Supporting Students with
Disabilities in the Regular Classroom
SANBORN, KELLEY
This is an introductory course in special education.
We will explore the needs of children with disabilities
and techniques for meeting these needs in the
regular classroom. The course will emphasize both
the social and instructional aspects of the concepts
of inclusion, differentiation, and serving students in
the “least restrictive environment.” Participants will
be introduced to concepts central to understanding

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

57

ED 4012 Integrated Methods IA: Grades K-4
Reading and Writing

the role of regular classroom teachers in meeting the
academic, social, and emotional needs of students
with disabilities. Objectives: By the end of the course
students will be able to: identify and describe current
issues and trends in education related to individuals
with disabilities and their families; describe the
special education laws and procedures impacting
individuals with disabilities; develop a working
definition for each area of exceptionality in relation
to achievement of educational goals, and develop
strategies and resources for modifying, adapting and/
or differentiating curriculum and instruction.

CURRAN SARGENT, LYNN

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisite: Introductory course
in Education. Class limit: 15. Meets the following
degree requirements: ED

ED 3106 Teaching Comprehensive Sexuality
Education
MAGNUSON, MADALYNNE
Where do babies come from? Can you pee with a
tampon in? If a boy withdraws his penis and doesn’t
use a condom, what are the chances of getting
pregnant? What if you enjoy gay sex but you think
you’re straight? From birth to death people are
curious about their bodies and relationships. So why
is it that so many people feel they lack the knowledge
and skills to be sexually healthy? This class will begin
by exploring the tenets of comprehensive sexuality
education (CSE), its history, and the religious,
cultural, and political reasons as to why it is or isn’t
taught across the globe. Over the course of the
term, students will explore theoretical frameworks
and strategies for teaching CSE, design an original
lesson plan, practice facilitating, and provide
feedback to their peers. Course topics may include
strategies for cultivating safe learning environments
and tools for promoting classroom discussion. We
will discuss the principles of mentorship and how
to engage young people in positive conversations
about sexual decisions, as well as how to navigate
teaching across diverse cultures, personalities and
learning preferences. This hybrid course will be taught
through a combination of evening zoom sessions with
occasional Saturday, day-long intensives. Students will
be expected to attend Maine’s Annual Comprehensive
Sexuality Education Conference. Evaluation will be
based on class participation (which will include small
classroom assignments), writing an original lesson
plan, and delivering a sex education event on campus.
Readings will include writing on evidence-based
approaches to sexuality education.
Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: Introduction to
Sexual Health or equivalent experience. Class limit: 12.
Lab Fee: None

58

This course is designed to prepare prospective
teachers with methods necessary to implement a
comprehensive literacy program for grades K-4 to
include all aspects of literacy acquisition. Major areas
of focus will include oral, visual, and technological
communication, shared and interactive strategies,
phonics, word study and spelling, independent and
guided reading, writing workshop, and writing in all
content areas. The course content focuses on an
integrated approach to the acquisition of literacy
skills, current best practice, and lesson design,
questioning techniques, formative and summative
assessment. Learning objectives address the
standards for Maine Initial Teacher Certification,
Common Core State Standards, and the Maine
Learning Results. There is a fieldwork component
of 50 hours for this ten-week course. For example,
two classroom observations for three hours each for
a total of six hours per week, excluding the week of
school vacation and week 10. There will be a weekly
one-hour lab, shared with Integrated Methods I: Gr
5-8. Evaluation will be based on the quality of a course
portfolio to include class participation, curriculum
and assessment design, performance assessments,
cooperating teacher feedback, and reflections on the
fieldwork and required readings.
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisite: Child
Development, Integrated Methods I: Gr 5-8, and, if
possible, Children’s Literature. Class limit: 12. Meets
the following degree requirements: HS, ED

ED 4013 Integrated Methods IB: Grades 5-8
Reading and Writing
FULLER, LINDA
This course is designed to prepare prospective
teachers with methods necessary to implement a
comprehensive literacy program for grades 5-8 to
include: motivation and the middle school reader;
helping middle school students develop their writing
voice through knowledge of language, vocabulary
acquisition and use, and working with a variety of
text; teaching critical, creative, and collaborative
technology use; using multiple tools to differentiate
instruction; creating and using rubrics for assessing
writing. The course content focuses on an integrated
approach to the acquisition of literacy skills, current
best practice, lesson design, questioning techniques,
and formative and summative assessment. Learning
objectives address Maine’s teaching standards, the
Common Core State Standards for students, and
the Maine Learning Results. There is a field studies
component of 50 hours for this ten-week course
(For example, three classroom observations for two
hours each for a total of six hours per week, excluding
school vacation week and week 10.). There will be a

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

weekly one-hour lab, shared with Integrated Methods
IA: Gr K-4. Evaluation will be based on the quality of a
course portfolio to include curriculum and assessment
design, performance assessments, cooperating
teacher feedback on classroom performance, and
reflections on the fieldwork and required readings.
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Pre- or co-requisite:
Permission of instructor, Child Development,
Integrated Methods IA: Gr K-4 Reading and Writing,
and, if possible, Children’s Literature. Class limit:
12. Lab fee: $20. Meets the following degree
requirements: HS, ED

ED 4014 Tutorial: Contemplative Science,
Practice, and Education
TAI, BONNIE
Since the turn of the millennium, research into
the science of contemplative practices—such as
meditation, qigong, taiji, and yoga, among others—has
exploded. The intersection of these practices with
fields such as cognitive and affective neuroscience,
cognitive and developmental psychology, integrative
medicine, comparative religion, education, and
sustainability science examine the impacts on mental
and physical health, socio-emotional learning, and
a less consumption-driven future. This tutorial will
survey those practices supported by evidence from
recent research. The application of these practices
have similarly flourished in mindfulness-based
interventions and programs in therapeutic settings
and schooling from early childhood to adult education
and professional programs including counseling,
medicine, law, social work, and teacher education.
Pedagogical approaches apply to classroom contexts
as well as informal settings such as environmental
education and include diverse approaches
such as collaborative poetry and contemplative
photography. This tutorial engages students in a
review of the research literature in parallel with
micro-phenomenological inquiry through sustained
individual or group practice with one or two practices
and journaling. Students will also spend a substantial
portion of the tutorial engaging in a variety of
contemplative practices with area teachers while
working on research or education projects. Evaluation
will include an annotated bibliography, synthesis of a
practice-based micro-phenomenological journal, and
a research or education project proposal focused on a
practice of interest.
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: A prior
intermediate education, neuroscience, philosophy, or
psychology course; recommended prerequisite: some
prior experience with a contemplative practice. Class
limit: 7. Lab fee: None

ED 5010 Curriculum Design and
Assessment
TAI, BONNIE
Human ecologists who educate embrace not only
the interdisciplinarity of knowledge, but also the
complexity of individual student development in
political school environments. This course focuses on
two essential nuts and bolts of teaching: curriculum
design and assessment. How can a teacher learn
what students know, how they think, and what they
have learned? How can a teacher use this knowledge
of students and subject matter to plan learning
experiences that will engage diverse interests, adapt
to a wide range of learning styles and preferences,
accommodate exceptional needs, and meet statemandated curriculum standards? This course is a
required course for prospective secondary school
teachers that provides an introduction to the
backward design process and diverse assessment
strategies. Students will engage in examining theory
and practice designing and implementing curricula
and assessments. A service-learning component will
provide students with the opportunity to observe and
participate in a variety of assessment methods in the
subject they aim to teach. The final project will be a
collaboratively designed, integrated curriculum unit,
including lesson plans and assessments. Evaluation
will be based on participation, reflective writing,
individually designed lesson plans and assessments,
and the final project.
Level: Advanced. Prerequisite: Supporting Students
with Disabilities in the Regular Classroom. Class Limit:
12. Meets the following degree requirements: HS, ED

ED 5011 Integrated Methods II: Science,
Math, and Social Studies
FULLER, LINDA
How can an integrated curriculum for elementary
school students help to deepen the relationships
children and young adolescents construct with the
natural and social worlds in a way that promotes their
capacity to know themselves and the communities
in which they act? For those preparing to be
elementary school educators (grades K-8), this
three-credit course provides an intensive guided
apprenticeship that prepares the student teacher
with the necessary knowledge, skills, and experience
to design an integrated math, science, and social
studies curriculum, create and maintain a constructive
learning environment, teach diverse learners
using appropriate teaching methods and learning
technologies, and assess student learning. Learning
objectives include all 11 of Maine’s teaching standards
as well as a working knowledge of the Parameters
for Essential Instruction for Math, Science, and
Social Studies. Students will participate in a ten-week
field work practicum observing and participating
in elementary classrooms as well as planning and

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

59

teaching weekly in a lab environment. Readings,
discussions, and experiential learning in class will
complement the field work component. Evaluation
will be based on reflection on fieldwork, participation
in discussions of readings and field work, curriculum
and assessment design and implementation, and
professional performance in lab school and at the
practicum site.

matter, a respect and caring for students, a concern
for equity, and a moral imperative for excellence in
teaching. Students spend 70 hours with their target
population and curriculum, as well as consulting with
content faculty (Some of these hours may be reserved
for fall term.). These learning-teaching experiences
are integrated into class discussion where students
analyze the elements needed for successful teaching,
learning, and assessing in their own content area
and across disciplines. The purposes, problems,
opportunities, issues, strategies, and materials
involved in teaching diverse adolescent and young
adult learners will be examined critically, and students
will be evaluated through class discussions, individual
and group work, reflections on field experiences, and
peer and virtual teaching and assessing.

Level: Advanced. Prerequisites: Supporting Students
with Disabilities in the Regular Classroom, Integrated
Elementary Methods I: Reading and Writing, and
permission of instructor. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: $25.
Meets the following degree requirements: ED, HS

ED 5013 Student Teaching
FULLER, LINDA
The student teaching internship represents the
student teaching requirement for COA’S teacher
certification candidates. Success in this experience
is a pivotal criterion in the student’s certification
candidacy. The student is placed in a school, usually
in the immediate region, with a cooperating teacher
who teaches subjects and grade levels that match
the certification goals of the student. The roles of
student teacher, cooperating teacher, school principal,
and COA supervisor are discussed and agreed upon
in advance. Incrementally, the student teacher
becomes familiar with class routines and gradually
takes responsibility for teaching. Within the fifteenweek experience, the student teacher must take on
a full load (all classes and all duties) for the number
of weeks agreed upon by all parties. This period of
time varies with subjects, grade level, and specific
student goals. The COA supervisor visits the schools
in a liaison capacity, and also evaluates the student
teacher’s performance a minimum of eight times in
the term. Student teachers meet together regularly
to discuss such issues as curriculum planning,
instruction, best teaching practices, classroom
learning environment, and broader educational issues.
Students may use student teaching to fulfill the COA
internship requirement if it is completed prior to
graduation.
Level: Advanced. Prerequisites: Permission of Ed
Studies Program Director. Meets the following degree
requirements: ED

Level: Advanced. Prerequisites: Permission of
instructor. Class limit: 12. Meets the following degree
requirements: ED

ENVIRONMENTAL
SCIENCES
ES 1014 Gardens and Greenhouses: Theory/
Practice of Organic Gardening
MORSE, SUZANNE
This class offers a good foundation of knowledge for
a gardener to begin the process of organic gardening,
as well as an understanding of what defines organic
gardening. The information presented focuses on
soil fertility and stewardship, the ecology of garden
plants, soil and insects, and practical management
of the above. The garden is presented as a system of
dynamic interactions. Emphasis is given to vegetable
crops and soil fertility. Laboratories include soil
analysis, tree pruning, seedling establishment,
weed and insect identification, garden design,
covercropping, composting, and reclamation of
comfrey infested area. Evaluations are based on
participation in class and lab, written class work,
exam, and final individual garden design.
Level: Introductory. Pre-requisite: Signature of
Instructor. Class limit: 15. Lab fee: $25. Meets the
following degree requirements: ES

ED 5019 Secondary Methods: Life Science,
Social Studies, and English

ES 1016 Ornithology

FULLER, LINDA

SWANN, SCOTT

This course is designed to prepare those who
are intending to meet the learning needs of
diverse populations of students in grades 7-12 or
late adolescent young adults in other learning
environments. It is an objective of the course to
communicate that teaching is intellectual work,
that it requires a dedication to and a love of subject

The study of ornithology is as old as human society
itself. Birds are particularly conspicuous elements of
our world, and figure prominently in our art, religious
symbolism, mythology, scientific endeavors and even
sport. Birds appear in European paleolithic cave
paintings from 14,000 years ago, domesticated fowl
are known from India circa 3000 BC, and ancient

60

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

scholars such as Aristotle and Pliny the Elder devoted
considerable time to ornithological observations.
In this century great strides have been made in the
study of population biology and ecology, navigation
and migration, and human induced ecological change
(sometimes called human ecology), all through the
study of birds. This class introduces the student to the
ornithological world by using both scientific literature
and direct field observation. Systematics and
physiology will be reviewed, but much of our effort will
concentrate on reproductive ecology, behavior and
the environment, and population dynamics. There will
be a strong emphasis on field observation—learning
how to look at birds and their behavior in order
to perhaps make larger observations about their
environment.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class
limit: 12. Lab fee: $75. Meets the following degree
requirements: ES

ES 1018 Physics I: Mechanics and Energy
FELDMAN, DAVID
This course is the first of a two-course sequence
covering a range of standard introductory physics
topics. The goals of the course are to introduce
students to important physical ideas both
conceptually and mathematically and to help students
improve their quantitative skills. The first part of
the course consists of a broad look at the three
conservation laws: the conservation of momentum,
energy, and angular momentum. Along the way, we’ll
learn about vectors, work, potential energy, thermal
energy, and the energy stored in chemical bonds. We’ll
conclude with a treatment of Newton’s laws of motion.
If time permits, we may briefly cover some topics
from chaotic dynamics. Evaluations will be based on
participation in class and lab, weekly homework, and
two untimed, open-notes exams. This course makes
extensive use of algebra and trigonometry. Potentially
difficult math topics will be reviewed as necessary.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: Understanding
Functions, a strong high school algebra background,
or consent of the instructor. Class limit: 20. Lab fee:
$40. Meets the following degree requirements: ES, QR

ES 1022 Introduction to Oceanography
TODD, SEAN
Planet Earth is misnamed. Seawater covers
approximately 70% of the planet’s surface, in one
giant, all-connected ocean. This ocean has a profound
effect on the planet’s climate, chemistry, ecosystem,
and energy resources. Billions of years ago life began
there, in what now we regard as the last unexplored
frontier of this planet. In this course we examine the
various disciplines within oceanography, including
aspects of geology and sedimentology, chemical,
dynamic, and biological oceanography. The course

concludes with an introduction to marine ecosystems
examined at various trophic levels, including phyto/
zooplankton, fish, and other macrofauna. Fieldwork
(weather dependent) includes trips on RV Indigo, trips
to intertidal and estuarine ecosystems, and possible
visits to the college’s islands, Mount Desert Rock, and
Great Duck Island. Evaluation will be by lab, quizzes,
and a final paper.
Level: Introductory. Lab fee: $150. Class limit: 20.
Meets the following degree requirements: ES

ES 1024 Calculus I
FELDMAN, DAVID
The goal of this sequence of courses is to develop
the essential ideas of single-variable calculus: the
limit, the derivative, and the integral. Understanding
concepts is emphasized over intricate mathematical
maneuverings. The mathematics learned are applied
to topics from the physical, natural, and social
sciences. There is a weekly lab/discussion section.
Evaluations are based on homework, participation in
class and lab, and tests.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: Precalculus or
the equivalent or signature of the instructor. Class
limit: None. Lab fee: $5. Meets the following degree
requirements: QR

ES 1026 Introduction to Chaos and Fractals
FELDMAN, DAVID
This course presents an elementary introduction to
chaos and fractals. The main focus will be on using
discrete dynamical systems to illustrate many of
the key phenomena of chaotic dynamics: stable and
unstable fixed and periodic points, deterministic
chaos, bifurcations, and universality. A central result
of this study will be the realization that very simple
non-linear equations can exhibit extremely complex
behavior. In particular, a simple deterministic system
(i.e., physical system governed by simple, exact
mathematical rules) can behave in a way that is
unpredictable and random, (i.e., chaotic). This result
suggests that there are potentially far-reaching
limits on the ability of science to predict certain
phenomena. Students in this class will also learn about
fractals—self-similar geometric objects—including the
Mandelbrot and Julia sets. We will also read about
and discuss the development of the field of chaos.
In so doing, we will examine the nature of scientific
communities, with a particular eye toward how
changes in scientific outlooks occur. Throughout the
course, students will be encouraged to explore the
relations between chaos, fractals, and other areas
of study such as literature, art, and cultural studies.
Students who successfully complete this class should
gain a quantitative and qualitative understanding
of the basic ideas of chaos and fractals, a greater
understanding of the cultural practice of science, and

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

61

improved mathematical skills. Evaluation will be based
on class and lab participation, weekly problem sets,
several short writing assignments, and a final project.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisite: A high school
algebra course or signature of instructor. Lab fee:
$20. Class limit: 15. Meets the following degree
requirements: ES, QR

ES 1028 Marine Biology
PETERSEN, CHRISTOPHER
This is a broad course, covering the biology of
organisms in various marine habitats (rocky intertidal,
mud and sand, estuaries, open ocean, coral reefs,
deep sea), and some policy, marine management, and
conservation issues. The largest part of this course
is focused on learning to identify and understand the
natural history and ecology of the marine flora and
fauna of New England, with an emphasis on the rocky
intertidal of Mount Desert Island. The course meets
twice per week with one afternoon for laboratory
work or field trips. Evaluations are based on the
quality of participation in class, one in-class practical,
several sets of essay questions, and a field notebook
emphasizing natural history notes of local organisms.
This class is intended for first year students, who will
have priority during registration. Returning students
may take this course only with permission of the
instructor.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: Signature of
instructor for returning students. Offered at least
every other year. Class limit: 20. Lab fee: $80. Meets
the following degree requirements: ES

ES 1030 Chemistry II
HUDSON, REUBEN
This is the second half of a two-term sequence
designed to help students describe and understand
properties of materials. This course begins with a
survey of how the internal structure of atoms leads
to the formation of different sorts of bonds between
them. It then considers how weaker forces can
arise between molecules and the sorts of physical
phenomena that such forces explain. The class
concludes by considering how to describe and explain
the rates at which (and the extents to which) chemical
reactions occur and applies such descriptions and
explanations to common types of reactions (acid/
base and redox). Throughout the course, examples are
drawn from living systems, the natural environment,
and industrial products. The course meets for three
hours of lecture/discussion and for three hours
of lab each week. Evaluations are based on class
participation, homework, midterm and final exams,
and a term project or paper. Offered every year.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: Chemistry I is
strongly recommended. Class limit: 30. Lab fee: $60.
Meets the following requirements: ES, QR
62

ES 1038 Geology of Mount Desert Island
HALL, SARAH
This course is designed to introduce students to
geological concepts, tools of the trade, and to the
geological history of Mount Desert Island. Throughout
the course, students will learn skillsets (topographic
and geologic map reading, orienteering, field
observation, note taking, field measurements) and
geologic principles (rock types, stratigraphy, plate
tectonics, earth systems, geologic time, surface
processes) both in the classroom and in the field. We
will conduct multiple short field excursions on MDI
and one extended weekend field trip to explore the
regional geology. Students will submit a term project
complete with their own field data, maps, photos, and
analysis of the local and regional geology. Students
will be evaluated on the term project, short quizzes,
additional written assignments, and lab reports.
Offered every fall.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class
limit: 16. Lab Fee: $100. Meets the following degree
requirements: ES

ES 1042 Geology and Humanity
HALL, SARAH
In this course we will explore how geology has played
a major role in human history and culture over
multiple temporal and spatial scales. We will explore
the underlying geological processes forming and
influencing our environment and how this relates to
human migration and settlement patterns, political
boundaries, geohazards, resources, the modern
landscape, and agriculture. This course will appeal to
students interested in exploring connections between
geology and other subject areas, or who are curious
about humanity’s place in geologic time. This course
will implement readings from a range of sources,
including geologic textbooks, excerpts from short
historical texts, and scientific journal articles. We will
use class time in a variety of ways: lecture-based;
seminar-style discussion; and laboratories spent
visiting local field sites. Students will be evaluated
based on their performance on weekly problem sets
or writing assignments, a midterm quiz, as well as a
term project with both oral and written presentation
components.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class
limit: 16. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree
requirements: ES

ES 1052 Biology: Cellular Processes of Life
STAFF
This course introduces students to the molecular
and cellular processes that are essential for life.
We will initially cover some basic chemistry to
develop a common language for discussing the
complex molecular events that are the basis of

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

the structure and function of cells. This class will
explore cellular processes involved in metabolism,
communication, growth, and reproduction. There
is a strong emphasis on the understanding the
genetic basis of these processes as well as how these
processes are controlled, and we will delve into the
structure and function of the DNA molecule in some
detail. We will examine how our understanding of
genetic processes and genome sequencing has led
to applications in research, medicine, agriculture,
and industry, with time also devoted to discussion
of the social and ethical consequences attached to
these technological innovations. Students will be
evaluated on participation, performance on problem
sets and quizzes throughout the term, and a final oral
presentation.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Lab fee $25.
Meets the following degree requirements: ES

ES 1054 Biology: Form and Function
STAFF
This is one half of a twenty-week, two-term
introductory course in biology, providing an
overview of the discipline and prerequisite for many
intermediate and advanced biology courses. The
course will emphasize biological structures at the
level of whole organisms and organs and their role in
the survival and reproduction of individuals and the
evolution of populations. We will explore principles
of evolution, classification, anatomy and physiology,
epidemiology, behavior, and basic ecology. The
primary focus of the course is on vertebrate animals
and vascular plants, but we will make forays into
other phylogenetic lineages at intervals. Weekly field
and laboratory studies introduce students to the
local range of habitats and a broad array of protists,
plants, and animals. Attendance at two lectures and
one lab each week is required; course evaluation is
based on class participation, exams, preparation of a
lab/field notebook, and a presentation. It should be
stressed that this course emphasizes the unity of the
organism within its environment. Ideally students will
subsequently enroll in Biology: Cells and Molecules in
order to further their exploration of issues in a more
reductionist form, but neither course is a prerequisite
for the other.
Level: Introductory. Offered every year. Lab fee $40.
Binoculars and a good pair of walking boots strongly
advised. Meets the following degree requirements: ES

ES 1056 Physics and Mathematics of
Sustainable Energy
FELDMAN, DAVID
In this course students will learn content and skills
so that they can participate effectively in sustainable
energy projects, make personal and community
decisions that reduce carbon emissions, and work

in ventures in sustainable energy. Additionally,
this course will be useful for those interested in
energy and climate policy, either internationally or
domestically. We will begin with a quick overview
of current CO2 emissions levels and look at how
this is related to energy use. We will then turn our
attention to basic ideas from physics, including the
definition of energy and the difference between
energy and power. The bulk of the course will consist
of a survey of different forms of energy consumption
and generation. Throughout, we will quantitatively
analyze technology from both a local and global point
of view. For example, we will calculate how much
electricity one can generate on a rooftop, and we will
also examine the role that solar PV could play toward
the goal of eliminating fossil fuel use worldwide. In
a unit on financial mathematics, students will learn
about the time value of money and several ways
of quantifying investments, including ROI (return
on investment) and IRR (internal rate of return).
Students will apply these financial tools in several
short case studies. If time permits, we may also cover
negative emissions technologies and the electrical
grid, including grid stability issues and the potential
of smart-grid technology. This will be a demanding,
introductory, class. Evaluation will be based on weekly
problem sets.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class Limit:
30. Lab fee $15.00. Meets the following degree
requirements: QR, ES

ES 1066 Chemistry I
HUDSON, REUBEN
This is the first half of a two-term sequence designed
to help students describe and understand properties
of materials. The course first explores how atomic and
molecular structure relates to the physical properties
of materials and their reactivity. The course explores
the reasons, rates, and outcomes of chemical
reactions. Course material is applied to better
understand living systems, the natural environment,
and industrial products. The course meets for three
hours of lecture/discussion and for three hours of lab
each week. Students are strongly urged to take both
terms of this course. Evaluations are based on class
participation, lab reports, and quizzes.
Level: Introductory. Lab fee: $75. Meets the following
requirements: ES, QR

ES 1072 Chemistry and Biology of Food and
Drink
HUDSON, REUBEN
Introductory chemistry and biology are explored in
the context of food and drink: the biology of crops,
culinary chemistry, and the biochemistry of brewing.
Major chemistry topics include atomic structure,
periodicity, bonding, acid base chemistry, kinetics,

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

63

equilibrium, colloids, and solubility of gases in
liquids. Major biology topics include photosynthesis,
respiration, plant and yeast life histories, cellular
reproduction, and metabolism. We will also explore
agricultural chemistry from a systems perspective,
examining strategies for keeping pace with the
demand for nitrogen and phosphorous in soils. This
course is meant to offer important, fundamental
chemistry and biology through the framework of food,
a universal human experience. These fundamental
topics in chemistry and biology will be explored from
the ground up, so no prior experience is required.
Meanwhile, the culinary and agricultural framework
should offer enough new content for students with
a background in natural sciences. Students will be
evaluated based on participation in classroom and
laboratory sessions, projects, and quizzes.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class
limit: 15. Lab fee: $60. Meets the following degree
requirements: ES

ES 1075 Geology of National Parks
HALL, SARAH
In this introductory geoscience course students will
learn foundational principles and concepts such as
plate tectonics, geologic time, climate and weather,
rocks and minerals, and surface processes through
an exploration of some of the National Parks of the
United States. Through virtual field trips of various
parks, students will visualize how regional climate and
surface processes such as rivers, glaciers, and wind
interact with the bedrock and surficial materials to
produce some of the most iconic landscapes. While
Acadia National Park offers a view of an ancient and
eroded supervolcano, Yellowstone offers a glimpse of
a dynamic landscape built on a modern supervolcano.
While a few glaciers still cling to the high peaks of
Glacier National Park, Yosemite hosts steep glacially
carved valleys and polished domes reminiscent of a
glaciated past. Class time will be used for lectures,
discussions of readings, and laboratory exercises.
During labs, students will get to know approximately
six different parks in detail through interaction with
geologic maps, rock samples, aerial imagery, and
scientific reports. The students will be evaluated
based on laboratory exercises and a final project
through which students will explore one park of their
choosing.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class
limit: 16. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree
requirements: ES

ES 1076 Polar Ecology and Exploration
TODD, SEAN
The Arctic and Antarctic represent some of the most
extreme environments on the planet. As physical
places, both poles play an important role in governing

64

the planet’s climate and heat flow. Both are suspected
to be rich in minerals and are thought to perhaps
hold short-term relief from current world shortages
in natural resources. As ecosystems, both are hugely
productive in spite of, and in part because of, the
extreme temperatures they experience; certain
species are found nowhere else and in fact thrive
in these remote locales. Superimposed upon these
natural environments is the presence of humans.
Exploration of both areas has been particularly
focused in the past century, with countless stories of
the perseverance and persistence of our pioneering
spirit. Initially surveyed to forward nationalistic
agendas, both poles are now sites of scientific inquiry.
In particular, the political model that currently
governs Antarctica as one massive protected area has
no precedent and perhaps suggests a way forward
for environmental agendas working on global scales.
More recently, the poles have been exploited by
ecotourism businesses.
This class examines the provinces of the Arctic
and Antarctic, wildernesses whose boundaries can
be defined physically, biologically, geologically,
and politically. We will examine the rich and highly
adapted diversity of life as it is affected by local and
global oceanography and atmospheric science, and
assess the impacts of climate change on these fragile
environments. We will also review our relationship
with these places and examine what future we
might play in preserving and/or exploiting the polar
regime, using human ecology as a model for our
understanding. Evaluation will be by two term papers
and participation in class activities.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class
limit: 15. Lab fee: $50. Meets the following degree
requirements: ES

ES 1081 Plants and People: Economic
Botany
LETCHER, SUSAN
This class offers an introduction to plant biology
centered around plants that are useful to human
societies. We will explore plant anatomy, physiology,
evolution, and ecology through case studies involving
plants that are useful to humans. Through lectures,
readings, and discussions, students will gain a rich
understanding of how plants function and how
human societies depend on them in myriad ways. We
will cover universal and familiar uses of plants such
as food, building materials, and textiles, as well as
less widely practiced uses including arrow poisons,
lacquers, and living fences. We will discuss the origins
of agriculture and methods of plant breeding, as
well as the biogeographical history of important
cultivated plant lineages. The focus will be on plants
and our uses for them, but we will also discuss ethical
concerns surrounding practices like bioprospecting
and ex situ conservation. Students will be evaluated
COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

on participation and the successful completion of two
presentations and a research paper.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Lab fee:
none. Class limit: 20. Meets the following degree
requirements: ES

ES 1082 Climate and Seasons: Maple
Production
HUDSON, REUBEN
Through the lens of maple production, we will
explore a variety of chemistry, biology, and climate
science topics, including: climate, seasonality, plant
physiology, density, (reverse) osmosis, and the
chemistry of sugars. The hands-on aspects of these
topics will be covered during an intensive 2-week
period over spring break, which historically overlaps
with the maple sap run in this area. Students will
learn how to identify maple, birch, butternut and
other tree species which produce viable sap for syrup
production. Students will tap these trees, collect
the sap, and concentrate it by reverse osmosis and
by boiling. Students will also learn how to prune
fruit trees, and why we do this in the same season.
Students will be evaluated based on their participation
in the 2-week spring-break session, as well as through
assignments, papers, and a final project completed
during the spring term.
Level: Introductory: Prerequisites: Permission of
Instructor. Class Limit: 6. Lab Fee: None

ES 1083 Lichen Biology
OLDAY, FRED
This course is a general introduction to the biology
of lichens, including the unique nature of the lichen
symbiosis and the structure, reproduction, chemistry,
and ecophysiology of these intriguing organisms.
Particular emphasis is given to field and laboratory
methods of identification including field recognition
of important genera, micro-habitat preferences of
selected species, collection techniques, use of keys,
methods of identification, and proper curation. Major
goals of the course are to have students develop
the “hands on” skills and the confidence necessary
to identify lichens to the species level. The class will
meet twice a week, three hours each meeting, with
one hour devoted to lecture, two hours to lab. An
all-day Saturday field trip is planned at the beginning
of the term to introduce students to the diversity
of microhabitats in which lichens are found, proper
collection techniques, writing brief, accurate field
notes, and starting their personal collections. In
addition, one or more Saturday morning help sessions
will be provided if needed to help students get started
on their personal collections. The course grade
will be based on: (a) class participation (10%); (b)
demonstrated capacity for doing independent work
(20%); (c) bi-weekly quizzes (40%); and (d) a student

final project consisting of a properly identified and
curated collection of 15 species of lichens, excluding
taxa previously identified in class as part of group
keying exercises or needing the assistance of the
instructor (30%). The final project must include a
minimum of seven crustose lichens. Bonus course
credit will be given for any new MDI, county, or state
records (5%).
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: none. Class limit: 15.
Lab fee: $55

ES 1085 Data Science I: Visualization
BAKER, LAURIE
How can one summarize information and data and
convey its meaning to others? What is an effective
data visualization? What is an ineffective or dishonest
one? And, for that matter, what is data? This course
will explore these questions by introducing students to
the broad field of information visualization. Students
will learn about different types of visualizations that
may be used to explore variation and covariation, the
evolution of processes through time and space, and
representing parts of a whole. Much of the work of this
course will be carried out using computers and the R
programming language, but we will also explore noncomputational approaches to visualization. Students
will develop skills in data collection, data cleaning, and
creating different types of data visualizations (e.g.
bar charts, scatter plots, density plots, heat maps,
violin plots, time series, and interactive graphics)
and effective data communication while working on
problems and case studies inspired by and based on
real-world questions. We will also critique and reflect
upon data visualizations in our daily lives. Students
will also gain familiarity with descriptive statistics
and ways to organize and summarize categorical and
numerical data to pick out key information.
This course is designed to serve as an introduction to
programming in R. Students will learn to gain insight
from data, to use literate programming and version
control so that these insights are reproducible by
others, and to develop code collaboratively. Students
who successfully complete this course will be able to
work with large data sets, transform those data, and
implement effective visualizations. Throughout the
course we will be using GitHub, ggplot2, Rmarkdown,
gganimate, RShiny and the tidyverse packages for
data manipulation. This course is intended to appeal
to a wide range of students. The skills and habits of
mind taught in this course are applicable not only
in the sciences and social sciences, but in almost
all fields. Evaluation will be based on several short
homework and lab assignments, participation in inclass activities, and a final project.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class
limit: 16. Lab fee: $0. Meets the following degree
requirements: QR

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

65

ES 1086 Introduction to Field Sampling:
Collection to Data Points
HUDSON, REUBEN
In this course, students will learn how to ask relevant
field science questions, how to collect samples in
the field (soil, water, air, plant, plankton, sediment),
how to process the samples in the lab (sieving,
counting, digesting, extracting), how to turn those
samples into data points, and how to communicate
the findings. When technical field skills are necessary
for sample collection, we will offer co-curricular
instruction (knot tying, canoeing for lake sediment
coring, kayaking for water sampling, etc). This course
will cover microplastic analysis in water and soils,
water chemistry (ions, pH, organic pollutants), and
charcoal analysis in sediments. Students will be
evaluated based on participation in field sampling,
lab processing, and lecture discussions, as well as
through regular problem sets and a term-long writing
project. Students will need waterproof shoes, sturdy
hiking boots, raingear (rain pants and raincoat) and
appropriate layers (synthetic or wool) for spending
prolonged periods of time outside. If students do not
have their own personal gear we can provide it for
them if we are informed by the start of the course.
All technical equipment (canoes, lifejackets, coring
equipment) will be provided.
This course is not by permission of instructor, but it is
linked to a pre-matriculation summer STEM program.
All seats will be reserved for first-year students.
Admitted students will be invited to join the prematriculation summer STEM program. Students who
join the summer STEM program (this will happen prior
to registration) will be given priority to join the class.
If there are open seats not taken by students doing
the summer STEM program, then these seats can be
made available to other incoming first-year students
when they register.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class
limit: 10. Lab fee: $0. Meets the following degree
requirements: ES, QR

ES 2010 Ecology: Natural History
SWANN, SCOTT
This course emphasizes field studies of the ecology of
Mount Desert Island, incorporating labs and field trips.
Each exercise focuses on a central ecological concept.
Topics include intertidal biology and diversity, forest
trees and site types, bedrock geology, soil biology,
insect diversity, pollination ecology, freshwater
biology, predation, herbivory, and the migration
of birds. Discussions include the development of
natural history as a science and the role of natural
selection in the evolution of diversity. Students are
expected to keep a field notebook or journal, to
undertake a project, and to write a term paper. Class
meets for two lecture sessions and one lab session
or two field/lab sessions per week. The course is
66

particularly appropriate for students concentrating
in environmental education. This class is intended
for first year students, who will have priority during
registration. Returning students may take this course
with permission of the instructor.
Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None;
field work involves strenuous hiking. Class Limit: 11. Lab
fee: $75. Meets the following degree requirements: ES

ES 2012 Introduction to Statistics and
Research Design
TODD, SEAN
This course introduces the basics of statistical
analysis that can be used in either a scientific or
a social science frame of reference. While this
course teaches you to perform both nonparametric
and simple parametric analysis both by hand
and computer, an emphasis will be placed on
understanding the principles and assumptions of each
test, rather than mathematical ability per se. We will
also learn how to report statistical results in journal
format, and there will be plenty of lab time to sharpen
skills. Evaluation is based on lab participation, three
quizzes, and a team project.
Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites:
A college mathematics course or signature of the
instructor. Class limit: 20. Lab fee: $40. Meets the
following degree requirements: QR

ES 2014 Trees and Shrubs of Mount Desert
Island
WEBER, JILL
This course introduces you to the native and
ornamental shrubs and trees of Mount Desert Island.
Lectures will cover basics of plant taxonomy and
forest ecology focusing on the dominant woody plant
species of the region. Laboratory and field sessions
will involve the identification of woody plants and an
introduction to the major woody plant habitats of the
island. The course is designed to teach botany and
plant taxonomy for students interested in natural
history/ecology, forestry, and landscape design.
Evaluations are based on class participation, weekly
field/lab quizzes, a plant collection, and term project.
Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Recommended:
Some background in botany, ecology. Offered every
year. Class limit: 16. Lab fee: $40. Meets the following
degree requirements: ES

ES 2020 Art and Science of Fermented
Foods
MORSE, SUZANNE
This course will take an in-depth look at the art
and science of fermented and cultured foods. The
first half of the class will focus on the microbiology
of fermentation with a specific focus on products
COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

derived from milk and soybeans. Each week there
will be a laboratory portion in which students will
explore how the basic fermentation processes and
products change with different milk and soy qualities.
These small-scale experiences and experiments
will be complemented with field trips to commercial
enterprises in Maine and Massachusetts. In the second
half of the term students will explore the differences
in flat, yeast, and sourdough breads. Final projects
will focus on a foodway of choice and will culminate in
presentations that explore the historical and cultural
context in which these different cultured foods
were developed and how these microbial-mediated
processes enhance preservation, nutritional and
economic value, and taste. Evaluations will be based
on class participation, short quizzes, a lab report,
journal, and a final project.
Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites:
Permission of instructor. Class limit: 12. Lab Fee: $75
(to cover use of the community kitchen, one two-day
field trip to Massachusetts, to visit commercial soy
product companies and supplies.) Meets the following
degree requirements: ES

ES 2030 Marine Mammal Biology I
TODD, SEAN
This course provides an introduction to the biology
and natural history of marine mammals, specializing
in species resident within the North Atlantic. Topics
covered include: phylogeny and taxonomy; anatomy
and physiology; behavior; sensory ecology; and
management/conservation issues. The course
includes field trips to observe animals in their natural
habitat, dissection of specimens, and exposure to the
professional peer review field. Students are expected
to complete two individual literature-based reviews,
one species- and one system-based, to be presented
in class. Assessment is based on class participation,
presentations as well as written submissions. Lab fee
covers costs of field trips, including potential boat and
field station time, and optional travel to a regional
conference during the term. Offered every other year.
Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisite:
Biology: Form and Function, Biology: Cellular
Processes of Life, and a writing-focused class or
permission of instructor. Class limit: 15. Lab fee: $200.
Meets the following degree requirements: ES

ES 2032 Rocks and Minerals
HALL, SARAH
In this course, students will learn to identify ~70
common rocks and minerals in hand sample, and
a few common minerals in thin section. Building
on their ability to identify minerals, students will
learn to properly classify igneous, sedimentary, and
metamorphic rocks using standard classification
methods. Beyond learning about igneous,

sedimentary, and metamorphic rock-forming
environments, we will cover topics such as plate
tectonics, geologic time, basic petrology and
mineralogy, tools and instruments used for chemical
and physical analysis, and natural resources related to
rocks and minerals. By the end of the term, students
will be able to relate a rock to its environment of
formation, identify common rocks and minerals
in hand sample, and relate the types and spatial
distribution of rocks and minerals to the geologic
history of Mount Desert Island and Maine. The course
will include weekly readings from mineralogy and
petrology textbooks and web resources. Students will
complete a rock/mineral lab each week and quizzes
every other week. We will visit a few local field sites
and as well as conduct one weekend-long collecting
trip to sites throughout Maine. The students will be
evaluated based on their performance on the weekly
labs and quizzes, the completeness and accuracy of
their collection, and a final project on the rocks and
minerals of one select MDI field site. The course fee
covers the cost of a weekend collecting field trip and
some field and lab supplies.
Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: none.
Class limit: 16. Lab fee: $100. Meets the following
degree requirements: ES

ES 2037 Introductory Entomology
GRAHAM, CARRIE
Nearly 80% of all described species belong to the
class Insecta. Due to their abundance, diversity,
and adaptability, insects are crucial components of
terrestrial, freshwater, and human-made ecosystems.
Students with a background in entomology can
apply their knowledge of insects to many other
fields, including botany, ecology, anthropology,
epidemiology, medicine, agriculture, climate change,
visual arts, history, and even the culinary arts. This
course will give students a sampling of entomological
applications within these diverse fields. Students
will be given a solid introduction to insect biology,
ecology, taxonomy, and identification through
lectures, lab sessions, and field trips. They will
assemble their own insect collections and will learn
to identify all Maine insect orders and many common
insect families. Lectures, field trips, and readings will
emphasize the important role of insects in human
lives and our impact on the environment. Students will
be evaluated on their insect collections, performance
on lab quizzes, participation, and one paper with
presentation.
Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: Bio
I or permission of instructor. Class limit: 15. Lab fee
$35. Meets the following degree requirements: ES

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

67

ES 2041 Physics II: Relativity
FELDMAN, DAVID
This version of Physics II covers Einstein’s theory of
special relativity. Topics covered include the principle
of relativity, spacetime intervals and proper time,
coordinate transformations, Lorentz contraction,
and relativistic energy and momentum. We will start
with first principles and carefully build toward key
results, allowing students to see how relativity—one
of the pillars of modern physics—was constructed
and how it coheres as a mathematically consistent
and experimentally verified theory. To gain a sense
of the scientific, social, and material context in which
the theory of relativity was developed, we will read
Einstein’s Clocks and Poincaré’s Maps: Empires of
Time, by Peter Galison. This class makes extensive use
of algebra. Students should be comfortable working
with mathematical abstraction. Evaluation based on
weekly problem sets, class participation, several short
writing assignments, and a final exam or project.
Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites:
Comfort with high-school level algebra. Class
limit: 40. Lab fee: $25. Meets the following degree
requirements: ES, QR

ES 2044 College Seminar: Ecology: Natural
History
RESSEL, STEPHEN
This course emphasizes field studies of the ecology of
Mount Desert Island, incorporating labs and field trips.
Each exercise focuses on a central ecological concept.
Topics include intertidal biology and diversity, forest
trees and site types, bedrock geology, soil biology,
insect diversity, pollination ecology, freshwater
biology, predation, herbivory, and the migration
of birds. Discussions include the development of
natural history as a science and the role of natural
selection in the evolution of diversity. Students are
expected to keep a field notebook or journal, to
undertake a project, and to write a term paper. Class
meets for two lecture sessions and one lab session
or two field/lab sessions per week. The course is
particularly appropriate for students concentrating
in environmental education. This class is intended
for first-year students, who will have priority during
registration. Returning students may take this course
with permission of the instructor. This course meets
the first-year writing course requirement.
Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites:
None; field work involves strenuous hiking. Class
Limit: 11. Lab fee: $75. Meets the following degree
requirements: ES, W

ES 2045 Applied Data Science
SHANK, KYLE S
There isn’t really much consensus on what data
science actually is. Some argue that it’s a nascent
68

interdisciplinary field that encompasses elements
of computer science, applied statistics, and data
visualization. Others insist that it’s a “fourth
paradigm” of science: empirical, theoretical,
computational, and now data-driven. Regardless
of what it is, what may be most important is to
understand what data science does and what you can
learn to do with it!
This course will be both a broad overview of how data
science is done in the “real world” with a specific focus
on learning applications of practical data science
skills. This would be a great class for those interested
in an introductory exploration of data science as a
primary area of focus as well as those looking to add a
degree of technical expertise with data to preexisting
work and interests. We’ll be focusing on four major
areas of application: (1) properly building data-driven
questions and hypotheses; (2) obtaining, organizing,
and transforming data; (3) exploratory data analysis
and pattern recognition; and, as time permits, (4)
data visualization and communication. Leaving this
class, students will be able to immediately apply these
concepts to a broad array of interests. For example:
students should be able to generate hypotheses
from disparate data sources (such as minutes from
ACM), obtain and transform data from websites (like
accessing the US Census Bureau API), explore and
analyze data to discover patterns (such as through
spatial biological data sets), and visualize such data
for easy communication to peers and laypersons.
Classes will be taught as a mix of live coding
exercises, lectures, and group discussions. No prior
programming experience is required—we’re going to
be learning to use the R programming language in
this course— but a familiarity with computers and data
will be helpful. Students will need to use either their
personal laptop or a COA loaner laptop for class and
programming exercises. Evaluation will be through
class participation and discussion, several data
investigation exercises, and a final project. The data
investigations will take the form of written analyses of
several well-known data sets as well as investigations
of synthetic ones created specifically for the course.
The final project will take the form of an oral
presentation of an analysis. This can be either done in
a group or as an individual and may be of any topic of
sufficient interest to the student(s) involved.
Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None.
Class limit: 15. Lab fee: None

ES 2046 Physics II: Modern Physics
FELDMAN, DAVID
What are relativity and quantum mechanics, and
why were they viewed as revolutionary when they
were formulated in the early 1900s? How and why
does relativity and quantum mechanics compel us
to discard commonsense ideas about the nature
of the physical world that are part of classical
COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

mechanics? Why is there not agreement on how
to interpret quantum mechanics, and why does
quantum mechanics even need interpretation?
This version of Physics II covers Einstein’s theory
of special relativity and selected topics in quantum
mechanics, and is designed to introduce students
to some of the formalism and central results of
relativity and quantum mechanics, so that they can
formulate scientifically grounded answers to the
above questions. Throughout the course we will start
with first principles and carefully build toward key
results, allowing students to see how relativity and
quantum mechanics—two of the pillars of modern
physics—were constructed and how they cohere
as mathematically consistent and experimentally
verified theories. The first half of the course will
cover relativity topics including the principle of
relativity, spacetime intervals and proper time,
coordinate transformations, time dilation and Lorentz
contraction, and relativistic energy and momentum.
The second half of the course will turn toward the
foundations of quantum mechanics, including:
spin-1/2 particles, wave-particle duality, and Bell’s
inequalities and the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen paradox.
If time permits, we may cover additional topics such
as blackbody radiation, the photoelectric effect,
Bohr’s model of the hydrogen atom, and quantum
cryptography. To gain a sense of the scientific, social,
and material context in which the theories of relativity
and quantum mechanics were developed, we will read
a number of papers and book chapters by historians
and philosophers of science. This course is designed
to appeal to a wide range of students—both those
whose interests lie outside of science as well as those
who are drawn toward the sciences or mathematics.
Students who take this course should be comfortable
working with mathematical abstraction. Evaluation is
based on weekly problem sets, participation in weekly
discussion sections, and several short reflection
assignments.
Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Class limit: 30. Lab
fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements:
ES, QR

ES 3010 Agroecology
MORSE, SUZANNE
The global demand for food and fiber will continue
to increase well into the next century. How will this
food and fiber be produced? Will production be at
the cost of soil loss, water contamination, pesticide
poisoning, and increasing rural poverty? In this
course, we examine the fundamental principles and
practices of conventional and sustainable agriculture
with a primary focus on crops. By examining farm case
studies and current research on conventional and
alternative agriculture we develop a set of economic,
social, and ecological criteria for a critique of current
agricultural practices in the United States and that
will serve as the foundation for the development and

analysis of new farming systems. Evaluations are
based on two exams, class presentations, participation
in a conference on potato production, and a final
paper.
Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: Signature of
the instructor and one of the following: Biology:
Cellular Processes of Life, Plant Biology, Ecology, or
Economics. Class limit: 13. Lab fee: $40. Meets the
following degree requirements: ES

ES 3012 Calculus II
FELDMAN, DAVID
This course is the continuation of Calculus I. It begins
by considering further applications of the integral. We
then move to approximations and series. We conclude
the course with a brief treatment of differential
equations. The mathematics learned are applied to
topics from the physical, natural, and social sciences.
There is a weekly lab/discussion section. Evaluations
are based on homework, participation in class and lab,
and tests.
Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: Calculus I or the
equivalent. Lab fee $10. Meets the following degree
requirements: QR, ES

ES 3014 Ecology
ANDERSON, JOHN
This course examines ecology in the classic sense:
the study of the causes and consequences of the
distribution and abundance of organisms. We examine
the assumptions and predictions of general models
of predator-prey interactions, inter- and intra-species
competition, island biogeography, and resource
use, and compare these models to the results of
experimental tests in lab and field. In addition we
discuss appropriate techniques used by ecologists
in collecting data in the field, note taking and the
appropriate collation and storage of field data.
Although this course is NOT a course in conservation
biology, we examine how ecological principles are
applied to conservation questions. Readings include
selections from the primary literature. Students are
evaluated on the basis of class participation and two
in-depth problem sets, drawing extensively on the
primary literature.
Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: Biology: Form
and Function. Class limit: 12. Lab fee $75. Meets the
following degree requirements: ES

ES 3018 Herpetology
RESSEL, STEPHEN
This course is a comprehensive introduction to the
biology of amphibians and reptiles. We cover the
systematics, physiology, behavior, and ecology of
each group, with particular emphasis on the important
contribution amphibian and reptilian studies have

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

69

made to the fields of physiological, behavioral, and
community ecology. Readings are chosen from a
text and from primary literature. The course consists
of two lecture/discussion sessions per week and
one lab/field trip every week. Weather dictates the
number and focus of field trips, but students should
expect to participate in both day and night field trips
throughout the term. Students are evaluated on class
participation, exams, and a term-long field project.

Placement Calculus tests, are ready for Calculus III,
as are students who have had Calc I and II here or
at another college. Calc III re-visits topics from Calc
I and II and extends them to multivariable functions
and vector fields. This is a great class for students
who want to review their calculus and take their math
to the next level.

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: Biology I and II or
equivalent, and one vertebrate biology course. Class
limit: 12. Offered every other year. Lab fee: $75. Meets
the following degree requirements: ES

HESS, HELEN
This course is a phylogenetic survey of the major
groups of animals without backbones. These animals
range in size from single cells to giant squids, and
they include the vast majority of animals on earth.
Using text readings, assigned articles, and one
afternoon per week of field/lab work, students
gain an understanding of the classification,
ecology, evolutionary relationships, and economic
significance of this remarkably diverse collection of
organisms. Students are evaluated on participation,
lab notebooks, and performance on weekly quizzes
and two tests.
Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: Biology: Form
and Function and Biology: Cellular Processes of
Life, or signature of instructor. Offered every other
year. Class limit: 16. Lab fee $25. Meets the following
degree requirements: ES

HESS, HELEN

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisite: Successful
completion of Biology: Cellular Processes of Life or
permission of instructor. Class limit: 16. Meets the
following degree requirements: ES

ES 3028 Calculus III: Multivariable
Calculus
FELDMAN, DAVID
The functions studied in Calculus I and II are onedimensional. But the universe of everyday experience
is, at minimum, three-dimensional. In this course
we explore how calculus can be extended so as to
apply to functions of more than one variable, and
thus apply to the three-dimensional world. We will
begin by reviewing vectors and functions of several
variables. We will then learn about partial derivatives
and gradients and how apply these tools to
multivariable optimization. Turning our attention to
integral calculus, we will next cover double and triple
integrals and their applications. We will conclude
with a treatment of line integrals, flux integrals, the
divergence and curl of a vector field, and Green’s,
and Stokes’s theorems. Evaluation will be based on
class participation and lengthy weekly problem sets.

70

ES 3032 Genetics
This course will explore the many roles that genes
play in the biology of organisms, the molecular basis
of gene function, and the methodologies used in
genetic research and application. Students in this
course should already have a basic understanding
from an introductory biology course of the structure
and function of genes and chromosomes, the
processes involved in gene expression, and patterns of
inheritance. This course will explore these phenomena
more deeply as well as delve into a range of other
topics, including population genetics, quantitative
genetics, genes in development, genomics, and using
genetic data to understand human evolution. We
will also discuss the use of genetic engineering in
industry, agriculture, medicine, and research. We will
meet twice weekly for lectures and once per week for
discussion of readings and problem sets. Evaluation
is based on short problem sets, take-home exams, an
oral presentation, and a final paper.

ES 3020 Invertebrate Zoology

To enroll in Calculus III students must have a
background in single-variable calculus. Students
who have done IB maths at either the standard
or higher level, or either the AB or BC Advanced

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: Calculus II or the
equivalent, or signature of instructor. Lab fee: none.
Meets the following degree requirements: QR

ES 3036 The History of Natural History
ANDERSON, JOHN
Natural history can be regarded as the oldest science—
indeed, at one point within the Western canon natural
history WAS science. Beginning with discussion of
early hunter-gatherers, working past Ashurbanipal,
King of Kings, Hellenistic Greece, the Roman Empire,
and into the herbals and magicians of the Middle
Ages, this course will survey the development and
eventual fragmentation of natural history into more
specialized branches. Once a foundation has been
established, we will engage with the naturalists of
the great age of exploration and conquest during
the 17th through the 19th centuries, ending with an
examination of natural history’s legacy in the rise of
modern ecology. Course readings will draw heavily on
original sources, using translations where appropriate.
Towards the end of the term we will discuss the
strengths and limitations of inductive and deductive
reasoning in science and the implications of the 20th

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

and 21st centuries’ increased emphasis on theoretical
reasoning. Students will gain a better sense of EuroAmerican history overall and of the history of science
in particular; the ability to use original sources;
understanding of the importance of comparing
multiple sources in arriving at historical conclusions,
and of the importance of recognizing cultural and
historical biases in interpretation of information.
Evaluation will be based on class participation and
the spoken and written presentation of individually
chosen research on a person or topic important to the
development of natural history as a science.
Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: none. Class
limit: 12. Lab fee: $50. Meets the following degree
requirements: HY

during the ten-week term. The field component of this
course will be self-guided through the observation and
documentation of weather phenomena. Who should
take this course: No prior geology/science experience
is needed—but expect to do a bit of basic math in this
course! The course level is intermediate because
it will not cover foundational principles of geology
(or other sciences) but instead the course will be
integrative and require students to practice both their
quantitative and qualitative skills. Take this course if
you are passionate or curious about climate change,
but do not know much about the science of climate
and weather.
Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: None. Class
limit: 16. Lab fee: $10 Meets the following degree
requirements: ES

ES 3037 Bryophyte Biology: Mosses and
their Allies

ES 3050 Organic Chemistry I

OLDAY, FRED

HUDSON, REUBEN

This companion course to Lichen Biology covers the
biology of the group of land plants known collectively
as bryophytes, which includes the “true” mosses,
as well as the liverworts and hornworts. The course
will cover the classification, morphology, life history,
physiology, and ecological requirements of the various
groups, as well as their rich diversity as directly
experienced by students in the field and laboratory
where emphasis will be given to the collection,
identification, and curation of representative taxa. The
ecology of sphagnum and peat formation will receive
particular attention, since poor fens and bogs are such
a striking feature of the regional vegetation. Two allday field trips are planned. Students will be evaluated
on: (a) class participation, including field trips (20%);
(b) demonstrated capacity for doing independent
work (20%); and (c) a student final project consisting
of a properly identified and curated collection of 30
species of bryophytes excluding taxa identified in
class as part of group keying exercises (60%).

This course explores the physical, chemical, and
environmental properties of carbon-containing
materials such as plastics, solvents,and dyes, as well
as all living things and once-living materials. The
emphasis is on learning fundamental principles that
allow one to understand and to predict the behavior
of various types of organic substances. There is
an optional lab section. Evaluations are based on
midterm and final exam. The equivalent of this course
is a prerequisite for biochemistry.

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisite: college-level
introductory biology or botany course, or consent of
the instructor. Class limit: eight. Lab fee: $25. Meets
the following degree requirements: ES

ES 3044 Climate and Weather
HALL, SARAH
This class will explore general weather and climate
patterns on global, regional, and local scales. We
will discuss the major forcings driving global climate
fluctuations—on both long (millions of years) and short
(days) timescales, including natural and anthropogenic
processes. We will also learn about basic meteorology
and the processes producing some common
spectacular optical weather phenomena (rainbows,
coronas, cloud-types, etc.). Students will complete a
term project comprising a photo-documentary journal
of the different weather phenomena they observe

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: A previous
chemistry course. Offered every other year. Class
limit: 14. Lab fee: $60. Meets the following degree
requirements: ES

ES 3060 Marine Mammal Biology I: Field
Studies
TODD, SEAN
This fall course provides an introduction to the
biology and natural history of marine mammals,
specializing in species resident within the North
Atlantic, in a field setting. Students spend two weeks
prior to the start of the fall term at the college’s
Mount Desert Rock Marine Research Station. In
addition to introductory topics in marine mammal
biology that include phylogeny and taxonomy,
anatomy and physiology, behavior, sensory ecology,
and management/conservation issues, students
also integrate themselves into the resident research
team and work on team projects that will include
observation of animals in their natural habitat. In the
fall, students meet 3-4 further times for dissection of
specimens, team project presentations, and optional
attendance at a regional conference. Assessment is
based on two individual literature-based reviews, one
species- and one system-based, to be presented in
class, participation in research projects, and written
submissions of their research. Lab fee covers costs of

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

71

field trips, including boat and field station time, and
conference costs. A $250 nonrefundable deposit is
required by June 1. Offered every other year.
Level: Intermediate. Prerequisite: Biology I, II and
a writing-focused class or permission of instructor.
Class limit: 15. Lab fee: $600. Meets the following
degree requirements: ES

ES 3061 Functional Plant Morphology
MORSE, SUZANNE
Despite uniform rules of development, seed plants
exhibit an incredible range of forms including
succulent cacti, bug-eating sundews, dainty annuals,
and leafless parasites. These differences in form
often are correlated with habitat and life history
parameters such as nutrient and water availability,
herbivores, light quality, and modes of perennation. In
this course we begin by examining the morphological
development and organization of seed plants from
inception in the seed to reproductive maturity. With
this general developmental framework, we then
examine whole plant and organ level patterns of
variation, modification, and ecological specialization
that underlie the variation in form observed today.
Evaluations are based on laboratory quizzes, paper,
midterm, and final exam.
Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: Biology: Cellular
Processes of Life or permission of instructor. Class
limit: 20. Lab fee: $15. Meets the following degree
requirements: ES

recovery of an ecosystem that has been degraded,
damaged, or destroyed.” In this era of widespread
environmental degradation, restoration ecology
provides an important set of methods for mitigating
anthropogenic damage. However, the science of
restoration is still in its early phases, and important
theoretical and practical questions remain to be
resolved. This class will critically examine the
assumptions that underlie restoration planning, both
in the ethical dimension and in the realm of scientific
theory. We will consider the validity of conceptual
models of ecological communities and ecosystems
and the way that these models shape decision making.
We will survey the factors that must be taken into
account during restoration and study best-practices
approaches, with a focus on adaptive management. In
the final project, groups of students will develop and
present restoration plans for a local site. Students will
be evaluated based on two essays, class participation,
and the final project.
Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: Any of a number of
courses including Biology: Form and Function, Trees
and Shrubs, Ecology, Weed Ecology, or Landscape
Architecture Design Studio. Class limit: 20. Lab fee:
None. Meets the following degree requirements: ES

ES 3083 Linear Algebra with Applications
to Differential Equations
FELDMAN, DAVID

ES 3065 Molecular Genetics Workshop
PETERSEN, CHRISTOPHER
This workshop teaches students how to apply and use
a variety of molecular genetic and cellular laboratory
techniques at Mount Desert Island Biological
Laboratory. Students learn how to do basic molecular
genetic techniques, including some subset of DNA
extraction, RNA extraction, PCR, RT-PCR, cloning,
and bioinformatics. Students work on how to carry
out a research design around a specific question, how
to carry out the research and interpret results. The
material will be taught around a research question
that the group will work on for a one-week period over
spring break. The course is taught by various MDIBL
research staff. Successful completion of the workshop
requires attendance for the entire week.

The first half of this class will consist of a rapid tour
of the key elements of linear algebra. We will cover
vector and matrix algebra, linear vector spaces and
subspaces, basis and dimension, the determinant,
and eigenvalues and eigenvectors. We will then
consider first-order linear differential equations—first
scalar equations and then systems of equations. We
will see that linear algebra is an indispensable tool
for solving systems of linear differential equations
and understanding the geometric structure of their
solutions. In addition to covering basic theory, we
will consider a handful of case studies that illustrate
the power of the mathematical techniques we are
learning. These case studies will be drawn from across
the sciences. The particular case studies we examine
will depend on student interests.

LETCHER, SUSAN

Students who successfully complete this course
will gain a solid introduction to the calculational
techniques and key constructions and ideas of linear
algebra. Students will also learn techniques for solving
and understanding systems of linear differential
equations. Additionally, this course serves as an
introduction to formal mathematics; students will
gain experience working at a level of generality and
abstraction a bit above that encountered in a typical
introductory calculus sequence. Evaluation will be
based on weekly problem sets.

The Society for Ecological Restoration defines
ecological restoration as “the process of assisting the

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: Calculus I and II or
the equivalent. Class limit: None. Lab fee: None. Meets

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: One class in cellular
and molecular biology (Biology: Cellular Processes of
Life counts) or genetics, and permission of instructors.
Class limit: 12. Lab fee: None

ES 3076 Restoration Ecology

72

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

the following degree requirements: QR

ES 3085 Watersheds
HALL, SARAH
In this course students will learn the basic field
and quantitative methods used to characterize
watersheds. The course will focus mainly on
watersheds of Mount Desert Island and some of the
larger rivers in Maine and will build upon foundational
concepts in earth science. The course will feature
field, lab, and lecture components. Students will
conduct geomorphic mapping (field and GIS),
surveying, stream discharge measurements, pebble
counts, and other common tools and methods
to conduct a term-long field study of multiple
island watersheds. Upon returning from the field,
students will use their data to calculate flows and
sediment loads associated with less frequent flood
events. Large magnitude flow events tend to shape
steam channels and have implications for human
infrastructure and intertidal zone dynamics. Students
will be evaluated based on weekly assignments,
quizzes, presentations, and the term-long project.
Students will work in teams to complete a basin-wide
study of one of the island watersheds of interest to
community partners for long-term monitoring. The
field project will culminate in a written report and
presentation. They will work on their project report
throughout the term with opportunities for peer
review and revision. It is strongly recommended
that students have taken high school math courses
(algebra and geometry), at least one introductory
earth science course, and are comfortable using Excel.
Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: Introductory GIS.
Class limit: 16. Lab fee: $100. Meets the following
degree requirements: ES, QR

ES 3088 Introduction to Neurobiology
HAYNES, NICHOLAS
This course introduces students to the structure
and function of the mammalian nervous system with
emphasis on the human brain and its connection to
behavior, health, and disease. Topics covered by the
course include structure and function of nerve cells,
synaptic transmission, gross organization of the
brain, sensory and motor systems, emotion, memory
systems, and diseases of the brain. This course
has two lecture/discussion sessions per week and
students are evaluated on class participation, two
take-home exams, and a class presentation.
Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: Biology: Cellular
Processes or equivalent, and permission of instructor.
Class limit: 15. Lab fee: None

ES 3090 Practicum in Sustainable Energy
GIBSON, DAVID

This is a hands-on, project-based class in which
students will collaboratively plan for and participate
in all aspects of renewable energy projects on
College of the Atlantic’s campus. Examples of
projects include installation of a solar photovoltaic
array, airsealing and insulating one of the college’s
buildings, or planning and installing a greenhouse
heating system. Students will learn how to take a
project from design through fruition while navigating
the various phases of the project lifecycle including
operation and maintenance. The course will begin with
an overview of existing technology and an analysis
of the current energy generation and consumption
data for the project site(s). The class will then plan
the project and present this plan to the community.
As part of this planning process, students will learn
about the economics of renewable energy systems,
including ROI (return on investment), IRR (internal
rate of return), and related quantities. Students who
successfully complete this class will gain the skills
necessary to conceptualize, plan for, finance, and
implement renewable energy projects. Evaluation will
be based on several short presentations, problem
sets, and active and effective participation in all
aspects of the project. Default grade is Credit/No
Credit.
Level: Intermediate. Pre-requisites: Permission of
instructor; Physics and Mathematics of Sustainable
Energy is strongly recommended. Class limit: 10. Lab
Fee: $50

ES 3093 Plants and the Urban Environment
LAWLOR, JOSIE
The proportion of people living in cities is increasing
worldwide. As we hasten to make our cities and
towns sustainable in the face of climate change, more
livable and healthy for the world’s population, we will
need to integrate plants more intelligently into our
built environments. Green roofs, rain gardens, and
bioswales are successful examples of highly designed
plant communities that serve multiple functions in the
built environment. Yet, generally, urban landscapes
present challenging and extreme living conditions for
many plants.
In this botany course we examine plant adaptation
to extreme environments. What do alpine plants
have in common with plants in a desert, or beside a
highway? What mechanisms and morphologies enable
plants to withstand heat, drought, or water loss?
With awareness that plants are the foundation of
our own habitat, we explore these questions through
lectures, lab sessions, and field trips to local sites. This
course is intended for students with previous botany
coursework who want to deepen their appreciation of
plants and their adaptations. Evaluations are based
on weekly quizzes, an exam, a field/lab notebook, and
class participation.
Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: Biology: Form and

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

73

Function. Class limit: 11. Lab fee: $20

ES 3094 Dynamic Landscapes
HALL, SARAH
In this course students will learn to make place-based
observations of landscapes to consider the processes
shaping them. Various climatic and tectonic processes
such as erosion and active mountain building are
continuously shaping Earth’s diverse landscapes.
Humans and other organisms are also shaping and
reshaping the earth’s near surface and have been
for at least thousands of years. We can describe
these geomorphic processes both qualitatively and
quantitatively in order to understand the rates and
timescales over which different landscapes develop
and evolve. Our descriptions and interpretations of
evolving landscapes enable thoughtful interaction and
inhabitation. Students will learn about the processes
forming and shaping landscapes through both the
interpretation of their own local observations as well
as an exploration of prior accounts. We are fortunate
to have a rich record of people’s interactions and
considerations of the landscape of coastal Maine
spanning thousands of years. Students will engage
with different accounts of the regional landscape
through readings, maps, and conversations with
community members. We will also compare aspects of
this region’s iconic glacially carved coastal landscape
with that of other similarly formed landscapes that
are currently located in different geographic, climatic,
tectonic, and built environments and therefore
exposed to different active processes. Students will
learn methods of determining the rates of landscapeshaping processes in order to consider the role of
human activities in landscape change. By combining
different types of temporal and spatial information,
students will learn to identify regional hazards such
as mass-wasting events (landslides, debris flows, rock
falls, etc.), flooding, and coastal erosion. Students will
be evaluated based on their performance on weekly
assignments and a final project in which students
choose one specific coastal Maine location to study.
As we will engage with various materials describing
landscapes throughout the term (i.e. narrative
accounts, maps, scientific reports), this project will be
an opportunity for students to practice place-based
communication. This course will make use of algebra,
GIS-online software, and digital spreadsheets (using
Excel or similar software).
Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: This course
does not have any prerequisites, but a college-level
introductory geoscience course is recommended.
Class Limit: 12. Lab Fee: $100. Meets the following
degree requirements: ES

ES 4010 Biomechanics
HESS, HELEN
Why do we get shorter and wrinklier with age? Were
74

dinosaurs warm-blooded? How do grasshoppers
hop? These diverse questions are all within the realm
of biomechanics. A knowledge of biomechanics, or
the ways in which plants and animals cope with the
laws of physics, can promote an understanding of
organisms at all levels of organization, from molecules
to ecosystems. In this course we explore several areas
of physical science, including mechanical engineering,
materials science, and fluid dynamics, as a means
of gaining insight into the biological world. Students
attend two lecture sessions per week and one threehour lab session for discussions of current research
in biomechanics, review of homework assignments,
and laboratory observations or demonstrations.
Evaluations are based on participation in discussions,
weekly problem sets, two term papers, and a final
exam.
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: One
college-level course in biology and one college-level
course in math or physics, or signature of instructor.
Class limit: 16. Offered every other year. Lab fee: $15.
Meets the following degree requirements: QR, ES

ES 4012 Winter Ecology
RESSEL, STEPHEN
In higher latitudes and higher altitudes of the world,
up to nine months of each year can be spent locked
in winter. Although migratory species appear to have
a selective advantage over non-migratory species
during the winter season, year-round resident animals
have evolved a remarkable array of physiological,
morphological, and behavioral adaptations that allow
them to cope with potentially lethal environmental
conditions. In this course, we focus on the special
challenges of animals wintering in northern latitudes.
Some of the topics that we address are: the physical
properties of snow and ice; general strategies of
animals for coping with sub-freezing temperatures;
life in the subnivean environment; animal energetics
and nutrition; physiological acclimatization; and
humans and cold. There are two discussions/lectures
and one field exercise every week, as well as two
weekend field trips. Students should be prepared
to spend a significant amount of time outdoors in
winter conditions. Students are evaluated on class
participation, exams, and a term project.
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites:
Permission of instructor. Class limit: 10. Lab fee $165.
Meets the following degree requirements: ES

ES 4016 Island Life
ANDERSON, JOHN
Islands have played a major role in the development
of ecological and evolutionary theory. Most recently,
islands have served as an important metaphor in the
development of conservation biology. Maine is blessed
with a plethora of islands—between 4500 and 6000

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

at the last count—and the history and pre-history of
these islands is intimately entwined with that of the
continent itself. This course examines historical and
current interpretations of island biogeography and
the interplay between natural and human history
and human ecology. The class will be taught as a
combination of term-time seminar and in the field,
based on the college’s field station on Great Duck
Island and the college’s research vessel. During the
spring term we will be meeting regularly to examine
the theoretical basis of island biogeography and
islands as the subject of scientific and literary
discussion since Aristotle. Readings will include
Darwin, Alfred Russell Wallace, and contemporary
authors. In late August we will re-convene for the
field component of the class. During the first half
of this component, we will be focusing primarily on
Great Duck Island and its immediate surroundings,
learning and applying theoretical approaches to island
landscapes, with extensive reading from the primary
literature. During the second half of the class, we will
move further afield, exploring a variety of islands
in eastern Maine, and relating our observations to
theoretical predictions. Ultimately we hope to travel
to Grand Manan Island in the Bay of Fundy to observe
a large island community, see the traditional weir
fishery, and observe firsthand migrating right and
humpback whales, and northern seabirds. Evaluation
based on participation, quizzes and a term project.
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites:
Permission of instructor; knowledge of boat-handling
and/or significant experience on the water is
recommended. Class limit: Eight. Lab fee: $500, which
helps cover food and travel for the field component of
the course. Meets the following degree requirements:
ES

ES 4018 Human Anatomy and Physiology I
ANDERSON, JOHN
This is the first course in a two-term sequence
designed for students interested in pursuing medicine
or biomedical research examines aspects of human
anatomy and physiology, with particular emphasis on
the digestive system, reproductive physiology, the
circulatory system, immune response, and elements
of nutrition and neurophysiology. This course will
emphasize the relationships between anatomy and
physiology and will focus on basic principles of
biochemistry, the musculoskeletal system, digestion,
nutrition, osmoregulation, and circulation. Readings
include a standard pre-medical text and some primary
literature. Evaluation is based on a number of in-class
quizzes, a term paper, participation in discussion, and
a final exam.
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisite: Biology
course work, some background in chemistry. Students
are strongly encouraged to take both terms. Class
size: 15. Lab fee: $30. Meets the following degree

requirements: ES

ES 4026 Cross Kingdom Interactions
MORSE, SUZANNE
This course focuses on the ecological and
evolutionary consequences of associations formed
between organisms that are markedly different in
form and function. A diverse array of interactions
ranging from pollination and termite digestion to
hitch-hiking mites are examined in order to explore
the role of symbioses in biological systems. In this
context we explore: the changing conceptions of the
major divisions of life; current models for explaining
the origin of eukaryotes, angiosperms, and two-sex
systems; coevolution; keystone species; and models
for assessing mutualism and parasitism within an
ecological context. Evaluations are based on ability to
read and critique primary scientific literature, class
participation, and the completion of a term project.
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisite: Biology
I and II and Ecology. Class limit: 15. Lab Fee: $25.00.
Meets the following degree requirements: ES

ES 4036 Wildlife Ecology
ANDERSON, JOHN
This course is intended to complement the overall
sequence of classes developed with a focus on
the landscape and ecology of the Northeast Creek
Watershed and is intended to provide students
with practical skills in observation, data collection,
analysis and presentation. It is particularly suitable
for students wishing to pursue careers in field biology
with federal or state agencies or land conservation
NGOs. We will examine measures of distribution and
abundance in animals and relate these to quantitative
and qualitative measures of habitat complexity. Much
of this class will be field based. Students will work in
teams collecting data on vegetation structure and
topography, trapping small mammals and estimating
abundance through mark/re-capture techniques,
radio telemetry, and game cameras. Data will be
analyzed using simple statistics including ANOVA,
regression analysis, and means-separation tests.
Spatial components will be included in an on-going
GIS for the watershed region. Readings will come
from a text and primary sources. Students should
expect to spend significant amounts of time outside of
formal class meetings in data collection, analysis, and
write-up. Assessment will be based on participation, a
number of quizzes, and an end-of-term team report/
presentation.
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: Biology
and Ecology; Critical Zone 1, GIS, Statistics strongly
encouraged. Class limit: 10. Lab fee: $50. Meets the
following degree requirements: QR, ES

ES 4038 Ecology and Natural History of

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

75

the American West
ANDERSON, JOHN
The American West has played a key role in the
development of modern ecology and in our overall
understanding of the natural history of North
America. Researchers such as Joseph Grinnell,
Starker Leopold, Ned Johnson, Phillip Munz, and Jim
Patton contributed enormously to our understanding
of the interactions, distribution, and abundance of
the enormous range of plants and animals occupying
the western states, while the incredible variety of
topography found between the Pacific slope and
Great Basin Desert, containing both the highest and
lowest points in the Lower 48, has provided an ideal
setting for both observation and experimentation.
This intensive field-based course will provide students
with the opportunity to examine first-hand some key
habitats within Nevada, California, and New Mexico,
and to conduct a series of short projects on the
fauna and flora in select sites. Areas to be examined
will include terminal saline lakes, open deserts,
montane meadows, pine forest, riparian hardwoods,
wetlands, and agricultural landscapes. Readings will
include primary sources and more popular accounts
of both locations and the peoples who have lived in
these lands over the past several thousand years.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, a series
of individual research projects and presentations, a
detailed field journal, and midterm and a final exams.
This course will be integrated with and requires coenrollment in Reading the West and Wilderness in the
West.
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites:
Permission of instructor. Class limit: Nine. Lab fee:
None. Meets the following degree requirements: ES

ES 4040 Animal Behavior
ANDERSON, JOHN
This course reviews how simple and stereotyped
actions may be built into complex behaviors and even
into apparently sophisticated group interactions.
Emphasis is placed on contemporary understanding
of Darwinian selection, ethology, behavioral ecology,
and sociobiology. There are two classes a week.
Extensive readings are chosen from a text and articles
from scientific and popular periodicals. Evaluations
are based on participation in discussions and several
quizzes.
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Requires a previous
intermediate-level course in species zoology. Offered
every other year. Class limit: 10. Lab fee $10. Meets
the following degree requirements: ES

ES 4041 Seeds
MORSE, SUZANNE
Over 90% of today’s terrestrial flora are seed plants
and provide the majority of the ecological energy
76

across the world. Today the majority of the human
population is dependent on the energy and nutrients
stored in the seed of a remarkably few crops that
arose through the breeding and saving of seeds.
Today this critical interdependence is rich with
questions that are at the center of the food security
and food sovereignty debates. Some questions of this
human-plant co-evolutionary story to be addressed
in this course are: How is crop breeding done in
different parts of the world? What are the techniques
for breeding, seed saving, and storage? What traits
are selected for in traditional and modern breeding?
What role do seed banks and libraries play in our
common future? What are the current laws governing
seed quality and ownership? How do these laws and
treaties structure corporate consolidation, community
initiatives, and possible mechanisms for developing
crops in the face of global climate change? What is
the “free the seed movement” and why might it be
important? The second major debate to be explored
will be the ethical and ecological implications of the
“assisted migration” of wild plants as a means of
conservation and adaptation to global climate change
and the replacement of horticultural materials with
wild plants as means for expanding native habitat
corridors. We will contextualize these two major
themes with an in-depth look into the biology of seeds
as well as the ecological and evolutionary significance
of seeds. In preparation for required attendance at
the Organic Seed Alliance conference, laboratory
exercises will cover seed dormancy and germination,
and build skills in hand pollination and trait selection.
Evaluation will be based on class participation,
leadership in seminar discussions, quizzes, a group
report on the Organic Seed Alliance Conference, and
the development of a final project based on one or
both of themes in the course.
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: Strong
understanding of botany (at least two botany
courses); one course with an introduction to some
kind of policy strongly recommended; Permission of
instructor. Class limit: 10. Lab fee: $150. Meets the
following degree requirements: ES

ES 4048 Biostatistics
LETCHER, SUSAN
This course will provide students with a toolbox of
techniques in statistical analysis, with a focus on
the biological sciences. Students will learn how to
choose and apply a variety of widely used statistical
tests, how to design experiments and studies with
statistical analysis in mind, and how to use a range
of specialized statistical approaches for data types
frequently encountered in the biological sciences.
The methods we will cover include: parametric
and nonparametric tests; approaches designed for
categorical, ordinal, and continuous data; biodiversity
statistics and ordination methods; Bayesian vs.
frequentist inference; and robust experimental design.

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

The class will highlight the assumptions involved in
statistical inference and the conditions that must be
met in order to use statistical tests appropriately. In
the lab, students will use the statistical programming
language R to explore, display, and analyze data
using the methods covered in class. By the end of the
term, students should be able to choose appropriate
analytical methods for a wide range of data types,
design statistically valid experiments, and write
code for basic statistical tests in R. Students will be
evaluated based on daily homework assignments,
weekly lab work, several take-home exams, and a final
group presentation based on an original analysis of an
archived data set chosen by the students. Note: each
student should have a laptop for lab (PC preferred;
limited support will be provided for Mac users).
Contact the instructor if you do not have your own
laptop.

(i.e., groups of organisms of the same species),
while community ecology studies the interactions
among populations. We will study classic models in
population and community ecology, developing the
models from first principles, applying them to real
data, and critically examining the shortcomings of
the modeling approach. Concepts to be covered in
the class include exponential vs. logistic population
growth, competition, predator-prey interactions,
metapopulation dynamics, stochastic vs. deterministic
processes, optimal foraging theory, succession,
and behavioral ecology. This course will be useful
for students who are considering graduate school
in ecology and related disciplines, and it is open
to anyone with relevant background knowledge
and curiosity. Students will be evaluated based on
participation in class discussions, a series of problem
sets, and a final paper.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: An
introductory course in statistics (Intro to Statistics
and Research Design, Probability and Statistics,
or equivalent) and permission of instructor. Class
limit: 15. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree
requirements: QR

Knowledge of algebra is necessary, along with a
willingness to grapple with mathematical thinking.
Knowledge of calculus and linear algebra is helpful but
is not required.

ES 4049 Biochemistry
HUDSON, REUBEN
This course explores the fundamentals of
biochemistry. Emphasis will be placed on the flow and
regulation of genetic information from DNA to RNA to
protein, protein composition, structure and function,
enzyme kinetics, metabolic pathways, and sensory
systems. The integration of these key concepts will
be explored through the lens of drugs: mechanism
of action, metabolism in the body, and manipulation
of protein and pathway function. This course should
be especially useful to students with an interest in
medicine, nutrition, physiology, toxicology, genetics,
and pharmacology. This class meets for three hours
of lecture per week; some sessions will include
laboratory demonstrations and/or experiments.
Evaluations are based on class preparation and
participation, midterm exam, and final paper.
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: At
least one term of organic chemistry and genetics is
preferred. Class limit: 15. Lab fee: None

ES 4050 Population and Community
Ecology
LETCHER, SUSAN
Ecology, in the narrowest sense, is the study of the
distribution and abundance of organisms on the
earth. This class focuses on ecology as a science, and
particularly the intellectual tradition within ecology
that has sought to develop simple mathematical
descriptions of complex phenomena. Population
ecology studies the growth and decline of populations

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: At least
one intermediate course in ecology and a knowledge
of algebra; permission of instructor. Class limit: 16. Lab
fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements:
ES, QR

ES 4053 Ecosystem Ecology
LETCHER, SUSAN
Ecosystem ecology is the branch of ecological
science that considers the large-scale transfer of
matter and energy among different living and nonliving compartments in ecosystems. Thinking about
the natural world with this level of abstraction has
provided critical insights into the processes that
support life on Earth, the feedbacks that connect
the geosphere and atmosphere to the biosphere,
and the ways life is likely to respond to large-scale
perturbations such as climate change. In this course,
we will explore the deep history of life on Earth and
how living things have transformed the chemistry
of the planet. We will study how energy flows and
nutrients cycle in present-day ecosystems, and how
these processes are coupled and regulated by the
actions of living organisms. Using examples from
terrestrial, freshwater, and marine systems, we will
study how to quantify fluxes of energy and matter. We
will analyze the factors that affect rates of ecosystem
processes such as plant growth and decomposition in
different ecoregions. We will explore the feedbacks
that link living and non-living matter into a single
complex network. The drivers and ramifications of
climate change will be a recurring theme throughout
the term. This course will be useful for students
interested in global change research, particularly
those who plan to pursue graduate degrees in related
fields. Students will be assessed based on class

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

77

participation, a research paper and presentation, and
a project on communicating scientific information.

discussion per week plus one three hour lab.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: Cellular
Processes of Life (or equivalent) AND Ecology, and
permission of instructor. Class limit: 20. Lab fee: None.
Meets the following degree requirements: ES

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites:
Permission of instructor; Biology I & II required,
additional courses in ecology and evolution strongly
encouraged. Lab fee $25. Meets the following degree
requirements: ES

ES 4059 Advanced Topics in Marine
Mammal Biology

ES 4061 Topics in Scientific Research:
Geoscience and Geochemistry

TODD, SEAN

HALL, SARAH

This class will extend on themes and topics that were
begun in Marine Mammal Biology. In addition to a core
syllabus in marine mammal behavior and physiology,
each student will choose a subject area of focus that
they will pursue individually—such topics could include
molecular science, sound ecology, communication,
and applied conservation issues. Prior to the actual
class, students will undertake a substantial block
of primary literature core readings assigned by the
instructor, in addition to other readings that specialize
in their individual areas of focus. In late August,
students will assemble at the Mount Desert Rock
Marine Research Station and become part of the
resident crew at the station. During this time they will
meet on a daily basis with the instructor for regular
classes; they will also conduct a research project
on the island as a team. Their residency at Mount
Desert Rock will be approximately two weeks. Once
the students have returned to the mainland, they will
continue to work on analyses of data for their project,
as well as individual term papers based on their area
of interest. Evaluation will be based on the team
project and its presentation to a peer community, a
journal/annotated bibliography of their readings, and
a final term paper.

This is a course in conducting scientific research
and practicing scientific communication through
writing and oral presentation. Each student will
spend the term working on one research project that
is part of broader ongoing research by COA faculty
or community-based work in the MDI region. Topics
for student projects will be tied to existing projects
and in collaboration with researchers, educators,
and community members. The projects may follow a
wide range of formats and should connect to student
interests. Some examples of possible projects include:
investigating seasonal variation in surface water and
groundwater quality and quantity, identifying the
resource needs of high school educators teaching data
literacy based on geoscience datasets, interpreting
the paleoecology of a location based on a sediment
core, exploration of geochemical reactions, analyzing
levels of contamination in the environment, or the
review and synthesis of the state of EPA standards
for the acceptable limits for chemicals found in
drinking water. After choosing a project, students
will ask questions of existing data, review existing
literature, design the next phase of a project, collect
observations, and make interpretations based on
those observations. Each week, students will practice
writing and peer review of project components:
proposal preparation, literature review, methodology
description, presentation of results or products, data
visualization, interpretation and synthesis connected
to prior work, and potential future work. Class time
will be used for lectures, meetings with visiting
collaborators or field trips, student presentations,
and writing instruction and revision. Students will be
evaluated based on their weekly written work, their
ability to meet milestones throughout the project
work, and their final dissemination (report and oral
presentation) of their project.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites:
Permission of instructor. Class limit: Three. Lab fee:
$600. Meets the following degree requirements: ES

ES 4060 Mammalogy
ANDERSON, JOHN
This class will examine the anatomy, physiology,
ecology, and evolutionary history of the class
Mammalia. Beginning with the evolutionary origin
of the first mammals in the Triassic we will follow
the adaptive radiation within the group, and the
development of increasingly specialized organisms
in response to changing climactic and biological
conditions. During the final portion of the course, we
will examine current theories of hominid evolution
and the effects of human dispersal patterns on
mammalian biodiversity. Lab work will focus on the
identification of North American mammals, but we
will also take advantage of other specimens as they
become available. Evaluation based on a series of
quizzes, a lab practical, and a term project focusing
on one family of mammals. Three hours of lecture/
78

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: At least
one prior ES course and permission of instructor.
Class limit: 16. Lab fee: None. Meets the following
degree requirements: ES, W

ES 4062 Applied Data Science II
SHANK, KYLE S
Applied Data Science II is a continuation of the themes
and topics covered in Applied Data Science I. Whereas
Applied Data Science I focused on data cleaning,
COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

organization, and visualization, Applied Data Science
II will be focused on building quantitative models
from data and using those models for predictive
purposes. This would be a great class for those
interested in a deeper, more focused exploration of
modeling within data science and how those skills
can be applied across a wide variety of fields. We’ll
focus on three major areas of application: (1) practical,
field-invariant skills for building complex models
from data; (2) understanding, designing, and building
predictive models (as opposed to other types such
as inferential); and (3) understanding, designing,
and building models that rely on various types of
statistical learning (also known as machine learning)
to produce results. Leaving this class, students will be
able to immediately apply these modeling skills to a
broad array of interests and topic areas. For example,
students should have the skills necessary to build
predictive models for population sizes in ecological
settings based upon field data, or students should be
able to build a machine learning-based classification
model for whether or not a given student will attend
ACM in a given week. We will also take special note to
cover areas of ethical concern that arise when using
predictive and machine learning models. Classes will
be taught as a mix of live coding exercises, lectures,
and group discussions. Prior familiarity with the
R programming language and statistics—such as
building linear models and hypothesis testing—are
required. Students will need to use either their
personal laptop or a COA loaner laptop for class and
programming exercises. Evaluation will be through
class participation and discussion, several data
modeling exercises, and a final project. The data
modeling exercises will take the form of written
analyses of several well-known data sets as well as
investigations of synthetic ones created specifically
for the course. The final project will take the form of
an oral presentation of an analysis. This can be either
done in a group or as an individual and may be of any
topic of sufficient interest to the student(s) involved.
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: Previous
coursework in statistics and R. Class limit: 12. Lab fee:
None. Meets the following degree requirements: QR

ES 4063 Analytical Chemistry
HUDSON, REUBEN
This course will focus heavily on field sampling
(primarily lake sediment coring), technical
field skills (canoeing, knot tying, camping) and
laboratory processing of the collected samples
(extraction, analysis, selection). This course will
cover a variety of analytical techniques including
gas chromatography mass spectrometry (analysis
of biomarkers from human habitation preserved in
lake sediment cores), inductively coupled plasma
atomic absorption (heavy metal analysis in sediment
samples), thermogravimetric analysis (to determine
organic and carbonate content of soil and sediment

samples) and 14C dating. For each type of analysis,
students will learn the technique’s theory, followed
by hands-on laboratory practice. Students will be
evaluated based on participation in field sampling, lab
processing, and lecture discussions, as well as through
regular problem sets and a term-long writing project.
Although field sampling will be a major component
of the course, students do not need to have any prior
experience with technical field skills; we will teach the
necessary field skills as part of the course. Students
will need waterproof shoes, raingear (rain pants and
raincoat) and appropriate layers for (synthetic or
wool) for spending prolonged periods of time outside.
If students do not have their own personal gear we
can provide it for them if we are informed by the
start of the course. All technical equipment (canoes,
lifejackets, coring equipment) will be provided.
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: At least
one college-level science course. Class limit: 10. Lab
fee: $0. Meets the following degree requirements: ES,
QR

ES 4089 Marine Mammals: In Sickness and
in Health
BURGESS, TRISTAN
Primarily practical course introducing students to
the fundamental concepts of physiology in marine
mammals and an overview of what health, threats,
and disease processes mean in the context of
marine mammals. The course includes a general
description of the key physiological systems, and
the most common diseases and health threats
to marine mammals as well as the role of marine
mammal health in changing ocean ecosystems.
Practical classes include an introduction to the
incident command structure, marine mammal
necropsy technique, sample collection, and the role
of necropsy investigation in marine mammal research
and stranding response. These dissection classes
also provide the material to review the link between
structure and function in anatomy and physiology
in the marine mammal context. Students will be
evaluated on the basis of their contribution to group
discussions, a student presentation project, and a
term paper.
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: Biology
I, II, Marine Mammal Biology and permission of the
instructor. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: $75

ES 5012 Conservation Biology
ANDERSON, JOHN
This course examines the causes, extent, and
ecological significance of the endangered species
crisis. We examine the role of extinctions in
evolutionary history and compare “natural”
extinctions to current events in the Neotropics,
Orient, and Oceania. We also discuss the significance

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

79

ES 5043 Neotropical Herpetology

of successful introductions of exotic species into
different regions and their effects on native forms.
Changes in land use patterns and the science of
landscape ecology are investigated. Finally, we
examine current conservation techniques in an effort
to establish a workable synthesis for specific case
histories. There are two lectures/discussions per
week, occasional evening lectures.

RESSEL, STEPHEN

Level: Advanced. Pre-requisites: Any one of Ecology,
Restoration Ecology, Environmental Law, Public
Lands, International Environmental Law or equivalent,
or signature of instructor. Class limit: 15. Lab fee $10.
Meets the following degree requirements: ES

ES 5014 Organic Chemistry II
HUDSON, REUBEN
This class will continue to discuss the occurrence and
behavior of additional functional groups not covered
in Organic Chemistry I. Meeting twice a week, we
will work our way through the remainder of the fall
text and then apply the material by reading articles
from the current literature of environmental organic
chemistry. Assessment will be based on keeping up
with the reading, class participation, and three takehome problem sets.

This field-based course will introduce students to
the immense diversity of amphibians and reptiles of
Central America. Students will meet weekly during
the term to read and discuss aspects of the taxonomy,
systematics, ecology, behavior, and biogeography of
species native to Costa Rica but the major emphasis
of the course will be on-site instruction and fieldwork
within Costa Rica. Students will travel to several
field stations located in different bioclimatic zones,
spending extensive time in the field learning the
herpetofauna of each region through observation
and application of field techniques. Non-travel days
will typically consist of early morning to early/
mid-afternoon field time, afternoon lectures or
discussions, and early evening-to-late night field time.
Students will be evaluated on their performance in
relation to on-campus discussions of the primary
literature, quizzes that focus on field identification of
species, and a series of field-based research projects.
Level: Advanced. Prerequisite: Permission of
Instructor, skills and knowledge assessed at time of
reviewing student applications. Class Limit: Six. Lab
Fee: $1600. Meets the following degree requirements:
ES

Level: Advanced. Prerequisite: Organic Chemistry I.
Offered every other year. Lab fee: $50. Meets the
following degree requirements: ES

ES 5044 Tutorial: Advanced Ornithology
ANDERSON, JOHN

ES 5038 Tutorial: Ecology and Evolution of
Parasites
HESS, HELEN
Parasites live on the surface or within the bodies of
a host, feeding off host fluids or tissues. Because
parasites do not directly kill the host, a parasitic
infection may persist indefinitely, sometimes decades
in the case of long-lived hosts. Parasites include
tiny, single-celled organisms as well as worms that
can reach many meters in length. This course will
explore the biology of parasites, with a focus on those
species that affect humans and domestic animals.
Some of the most prevalent human diseases, such as
malaria and schistosomiasis, are caused by parasites.
Students will learn about the evolution o f complex life
histories and the various means of evading the host’s
immune system employed by parasites. We will meet
twice a week for lecture and discussion of reading
from the primary literature as well as the popular
literature. Students will take turns presenting material
on specific issues and examples they have research.
Evaluation based on quality of contribution to class
discussions, presentation, and several short written
assignments.
Level: Advanced. Pre-requisite: Invertebrate Zoology
and signature of instructor. Class limit: Six. Lab fee:
None

80

This is a course in Ornithology in the traditional
sense: a literature and lab-based assessment of the
evolution, taxonomy, and structure of Class Aves.
We will begin with an overview of the evolutionary
diversification of birds, discuss unique adaptations
that have allowed this group of vertebrates to spread
across the entire planet, and then examine details
of physiology and anatomy, including reproduction,
developmental biology and feeding and locomotion.
We will explore both current and historical literature
in bird behavior, with occasional guest lectures from
authors of some papers we discuss. A strong interest
in taxonomy is assumed. Labs will include dissection,
some microscopy, and observation of behavior.
Evaluation will be based on class participation,
midterm and final exams, and an in-class presentation
on a specific family of birds.
Level: Advanced. Prerequisites: Ecology, extensive
field-work in ornithology, and permission of instructor.
Class Limit: Three. Lab Fee: None

ES 5045 Marine Ecology
PETERSEN, CHRISTOPHER
This course focuses on current and classical research
in marine ecology worldwide, with a strong focus
on understanding the primary literature, and then
conducting field studies that apply these ideas
to current questions in Maine intertidal marine

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

ecology. The first half of the term we will be reading
and discussing both primary literature and review
papers covering the ecology and evolution of marine
organisms. Students will read papers, provide short
written responses before class, and have two small
synthetic problem sets or essays over this portion
of the term. The second half of the term students
will divide their time between a large class project
and small group projects, with projects largely
based in the local intertidal community. Much of this
fieldwork will be tide dependent and occur outside
of the listed classroom time. Projects may include
the population biology and ecology of introduced
species, intraspecific variation in morphology and
behavior, using eDNA or individual barcoding to help
determine local species composition, and estimates of
biodiversity in local habitats. Students will also take
part in an applied class project aimed at assisting
with the management and monitoring of locally comanaged species, clams, and alewives.
Level: Advanced. Prerequisites: One class in marine
biology and at least two additional courses in ecology,
evolution, or statistics and research design, and
permission of instructor. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: $50.
Meets the following degree requirements: ES

HUMAN ECOLOGY
HE 1010 Human Ecology Core Course
STAFF
Human ecology is the interdisciplinary study of the
relationships between humans and their natural and
cultural environments. The purpose of this course is
to build a community of learners that explores the
question of human ecology from the perspectives of
the arts, humanities, and sciences, both inside and
outside of the classroom. By the end of the course
students should be familiar with how differently these
three broad areas ask questions, pose solutions, and
become inextricably intertwined when theoretical
ideas are put into practice. In the end, we want
students to be better prepared to create their own
human ecology degree through a more in-depth
exploration of the courses offered at College of the
Atlantic. We will approach this central goal through a
series of directed readings and activities.
Level: Introductory. Lab fee: $30. Meets the following
degree requirements: HE

HUMAN STUDIES
HS 0958 Introduction to Academic Writing
CASS, BLAKE
Introduction to Academic Writing introduces students

not only to writing as process—prewriting, writing, and
rewriting—but also to resources that aid students in
writing successfully in an academic setting. Students
will meet weekly as a class and individually with the
instructor and/or peer tutor. They will also meet with
library staff who will introduce students to the range
of online resources available and how best to access
them. Both the writing and speaking assignments are
based on assignments in other courses, particularly
the Human Ecology Core Course. Since writing is a
maturation process, evaluations are based on the
student’s growth as a writer, participation in class
discussions and peer review sessions, and ability
to meet deadlines. This course may be taken either
for credit or non-credit, and prepares students to
successfully take Writing Seminar I and II, Introduction
to Journalism, Communicating Science, and any of the
college seminars, all of which meet the Writing Course
degree requirement.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: Permission of
instructor. Class limit: 10. Lab fee: None

HS 1011 Environmental History
LITTLE-SIEBOLD, TODD
How has human history shaped and been shaped by
the environment? Environmental history is one of
the most exciting new fields in history. In this course
we examine world history from Mesopotamia to
the present to see the role such things as resource
scarcity, mythology, philosophy, imperialism, land
policy, theology, plagues, scientific revolutions, the
discovery of the new world, the industrial revolution,
and etc. on the natural, social, and built environments.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class
limit: 20. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree
requirements: HS, HY

HS 1012 Introduction to the Legal Process
CLINE, KEN
The law affects every aspect of human activity.
As human ecologists we must garner some basic
understanding of how law is used (or misused) to
shape society and human behavior. This course
examines two aspects of the American legal system:
1) the judicial process or how we resolve disputes;
and 2) the legislative process or how we enact policy.
Course readings cover everything from classic
jurisprudence essays to the daily newspaper. We use
current environmental and social issues to illustrate
specific applications of the legal process. Legal brief
preparation, mock courtroom presentations, lobbying
visits to the Maine legislature, and guest lectures are
used to give a practical dimension to course subjects.
Students analyze Federal Election Commission
documents to understand the impact of campaign
financing on public policy and look closely at other
current issues facing the legislative and judicial

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

81

systems. Evaluation is based upon two papers and
several other exercises.
Level: Introductory. Offered every other year. Class
limit: 30. Lab fee $20. Meets the following degree
requirements: HS

HS 1013 From Native Empires to Nation
States
LITTLE-SIEBOLD, TODD
This course is a history of Latin America from Native
American contact cultures through the contemporary
period covering socio-political processes. An emphasis
is placed on the fusion of pre-contact societies
into a new socio-cultural formation in the colonial
period, and then the shared yet divergent history
of the region after the collapse of colonial rule. In
the second half the class emphasizes the rise of the
nation state in Latin America with particular emphasis
on dictatorship and rebellions. The course uses
traditional texts, novels, and films to explore this huge
geographical and chronological expanse.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class
limit: 20. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree
requirements: HY, HS

HS 1014 Feminist Theory in a Transnational
Frame I
VAN VLIET, NETTA
This course introduces students to some of the
central texts and genealogies of feminist thought,
with a focus on transnational feminist theory. We will
address periods of feminist thought that have been
significant in shaping the concerns of transnational
feminisms, including 1970s US feminism, French
feminism, postcolonial theory, and Marxist thought.
Over the course of the term, we will consider how
differences across national borders have informed
discussions about transnational feminist solidarity.
We will examine how feminist theory can help us think
about the following: kinship; reproduction; the law and
justice; human rights discourse; political economy;
racialization and other forms of difference; existence
and the subject; the relation between individual and
group; the relation between terms such as “gender”
and “sex;” and the varied currencies the terms
“queer” and “feminist” have carried in different
national and transnational contexts.
The course will explicitly address debates in
feminist theory about the following topics: the sex/
gender distinction; histories and politics of the
term “rape;” political representation, the juridical
and the nation-state in the contexts of religious
and cultural differences around practices such
as veiling, circumcision/genital mutilation; and
questions of labor, prostitution, and sex work. The
course draws on work in French feminist theory,
queer theory, postcolonial studies, psychoanalysis,
82

continental philosophy, cultural anthropology, and
diaspora studies. Readings will include texts by Gayle
Rubin, Luce Irigaray, Elizabeth Grosz, Simone de
Beauvoir, Ranjana Khanna, Monique Wittig, Judith
Butler, Gayatri Spivak, Sigmund Freud, Friedreich
Engels, Shulamith Firestone, Alexandra Kollontai,
Emma Goldman, bell hooks, Karen Engle, Catherine
McKinnon, Drucilla Cornell, Ratna Kapur, Sarah
Franklin, Daniel Boyarin, Henry Louis Gates, Anne
Fausto-Sterling, Shoshana Felman, Saba Mahmood,
Diana Fuss, and Chandra Mohanty.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class
limit: 15. Lab fee: $15. Meets the following degree
requirements: HS

HS 1019 Beginning Spanish I
PEÑA, KARLA
This course is for students who have had no contact
with Latin American culture, do not possess basic
Spanish language structures and expressions,
and have no Spanish vocabulary. The emphasis is
on development of the basic skills required in any
language—listening, speaking, writing, and reading
comprehension. Objective: Students will be able to
express themselves orally and through writing, using
vocabulary and simple construction of Spanish in the
indicative tense. This includes present tense study,
vocabulary, numbers, proper nouns, salutations and
presentations, present perfect tense, action verbs, the
usage of “to be” and “is,” future tense, vocabulary,
and some usage of “for.” Evaluation criteria: two
compositions, two auditory tests, two writing tests
covering grammar, two oral tests, assignments/
homework, and class participation.
Level: Introductory. Offered every fall. Class limit: 10.
Lab fee: $20

HS 1020 Beginning Spanish II
PEÑA, KARLA
This course is intended for students with a basic
knowledge of grammar, using common vocabulary
that is needed for everyday situations. Objective: The
students will be able to express themselves orally and
through writing using subject-verb agreement, basic
form in the indicative tense, and an introduction to the
imperative moods. It includes a review of the present
and future tenses, study of the imperfect tense, action
verbs, direct object, proper nouns, the indicative
tense, the use of the “to be” and “is” verbs, and an
introduction to prepositions. Evaluation criteria: two
compositions, two auditory tests, two writing tests
covering grammar, two oral tests, assignments/
homework, and class participation.
Level: Introductory. Offered every fall. Class limit: 10.
Lab fee: $20

HS 1021 History of the American
COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

Conservation Movement
CLINE, KEN
This course provides students with an overview of
the American conservation movement from the
1600s through the present. Through an examination
of historical accounts and contemporary analysis,
students develop an understanding of the issues,
places, value conflicts, and people who have shaped
conservation and environmental policy in the United
States. They also gain an appreciation for the
relationship between the conservation movement and
other social and political movements. Students should
come away with a sense of the historical and cultural
context of American attitudes toward nature. We also
seek to apply these lessons to policy debates currently
underway in Maine. Working from original writings,
students do in-depth research on a selected historical
figure. Evaluation is based on problem sets, group
activities, participation, and a final paper.

experiential class is specifically geared toward firstyear students and they will be given preference for
enrollment. Assignments will include journal writing,
short exercises, a group project/service learning
opportunity, short presentations, and papers.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class
limit: 24. Lab fee: $40. Meets the following degree
requirements: HS

HS 1039 Writing Seminar I: Exposition
STAFF

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class
limit: 20. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree
requirements: HS, HY

Designed to serve the overall academic program,
this course focuses on formal writing based on
rhetorical principles of exposition and concentrates
on the writing process—prewriting, writing, and
rewriting. Assigned readings both illustrate how to
use these principles and develop students’ analytical
skills. Through a research paper or case study, this
course introduces students to library research and
documentation of an academic paper. Each section
emphasizes peer review, revision, regular conferences,
and some class presentations.

HS 1025 Business and Non-Profit Basics

Level: Introductory. Class limit: 12. Meets the following
degree requirements: W

FRIEDLANDER, JAY
Anyone who is involved with for profit or nonprofit
enterprises needs to understand a wide variety of
interdisciplinary skills. This introductory course will
introduce students to marketing, finance, leadership,
strategy, and other essential areas of knowledge
needed to run or participate in any venture. This
course is meant to build basic skills and expose
students to a variety of business disciplines.
Level: Introductory. Class limit: 18. Meets the following
degree requirements: HS

HS 1032 Acadia: Exploring the National
Park Idea
CLINE, KEN
Using Acadia National Park as a case study, this
course will explore the various facets of the national
park idea, and what it means for Americans in terms
of history and identity. Through direct experiences
in one of the crown jewels of the park system, the
class will examine the historical, ecological, cultural,
social, legal, economic, and spiritual context in which
national parks are formed and continue to exist in
the 21st century. We will work with National Park
Service professionals to look at various aspects of
park management and day-to-day challenges of
implementing the national park idea. Through weekly
field trips, journaling, service learning opportunities,
and projects, we will be immersed in the management
and experience of Acadia. We will explore, through
reading and writing, the broader themes of wilderness
preservation, attitudes toward nature, the history of
conservation, and the commodification of nature. This

HS 1042 Globalization/Anti-Globalization
VAN VLIET, NETTA
The terms globalization and anti-globalization are
often used to refer to increasing cultural homogeneity
across the globe, but also to growing familiarity with
multiple forms of diversity and intercultural exchange.
These terms also reference notions of progress
and development, but also increasing poverty and
inequality. In this course, we will look at how historical
perspectives of the forces of globalization— including
capitalism, European modernity and its colonial
histories —shape contemporary understandings of,
and debates over, immigration, labor, gender and
ethnic differences, national boundaries and their
transgression, the law, justice, and human rights. We
will think critically about concepts such as agency,
freedom, and even the notion of the human itself.
Relatedly, this course will challenge you to think
about the implications of how difference—national,
gender, ethnic, and otherwise—is understood in
terms of globalization for political problems such
as war, poverty, environmental destruction, sexual
violence, imperialism, and freedom of movement
and expression. Over the course of the term, we will
examine how human relations in specific locales are
shaped through economic and cultural exchanges,
mass media, different forms of representation and
changing means of mobility. To this end, we will
draw on specific examples from African, European,
Middle Eastern and Latin American contexts. This is
an interdisciplinary course that draws on the fields
of anthropology, literature, feminist theory, and

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

83

postcolonial studies. In addition to academic texts,
we will be reading from novels, engaging with film,
and listening to music. Evaluation of students will be
based on the following: informal reading responses,
one midterm paper and one final paper, and class
participation.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class Limit:
15

HS 1046 Introduction to Economics and the
Economy
TAYLOR, DAVIS
This course provides students with an introduction
to both economic theory and the historical and
institutional background needed to understand the
context, functioning, and trajectory of 21st century
economies. On the theoretical side, students will
be introduced to explanations of the economic
behavior of individuals and firms (microeconomics)
and the workings of national economies and
money (macroeconomics), including economic
development and international topics such as trade
and exchange rates. In addition to the standard
neoclassical approaches to these topics, we will
also introduce behavioral, feminist, Marxist, and
ecological economics perspectives. Complementing
these theoretical approaches will be a rich immersion
in historical and institutional themes such as the
history of capitalism, the rise of corporations, the
institutional background of markets for stocks,
bonds, and derivatives, inequality and poverty,
state-led capitalism (e.g. as seen in China and Brazil)
and the events that led up to recent financial crises
in the United States and Europe. Evaluation will be
based on bi-weekly problem sets, a final exam, and
various forms of classroom participation. Learning
will be facilitated by a weekly lab session that will be
scheduled the first week of the term.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class
limit: 15. Lab fee: $15. Meets the following degree
requirements: HS, QR

HS 1052 Ethnographic Methods
VAN VLIET, NETTA
Ethnographic research is based primarily on
anthropology’s signature research method, known
as participant-observation fieldwork. This course
introduces students to the main techniques,
questions, insights and debates that this research
method has historically involved in the formation of
the discipline of anthropology, and the contemporary
relevance of these questions and debates for a range
of ethnographic and interdisciplinary projects. Over
the term, students will view ethnographic films and
read classic and contemporary ethnographic texts, as
well as social and political theory that has informed
ethnography. The course will address questions about
84

representation, authenticity, experience, evidence,
familiarity and difference, place and time, the
everyday and the extraordinary, politics and ethics.
Students will be asked to participate in the central
methods of ethnographic research including taking
fieldnotes, conducting formal and informal interviews
with both familiar others and with strangers,
formulating a research question, and analyzing
qualitative data. Assignments will include informal
reading responses, a midterm mini-field project, and
a final mini-field project that builds on the midterm.
Evaluation will be based on these assignments and
on class participation and final presentations of their
projects.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class
limit: 12. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree
requirements: HS

HS 1053 Intimate Partner Violence:
Dynamics and Community Response
GAGNON DA SILVA, PAMELA
From a historical perspective domestic violence
has been noted as primarily a “women’s issue.” We
now recognize the misuse of power and control in
relationships as a complex and prevalent social issue
that profoundly impacts our society as a whole. To
address the complexity of domestic violence we
must strive toward changing the belief systems that
allow this problem to exist. Together we will explore
these belief systems by examining the aspects of
culture that shape and support domestic violence
on individual, community, institutional, and global
levels. We will review the history of the domestic
violence movement, including its roots in the women’s
movement and how that movement grew into a
network of victim-centered services and communitybased advocacy responses. As a student you will
learn how best to respond to victims of intimate
partner violence, and how to apply the core principles
of individual, community, institutional, and social
change advocacy. You will be challenged to consider
and reflect upon your own beliefs and cultural lenses
throughout the course. The class format includes
lectures, roleplays, media presentations, interviews
with guest speakers, group work, and discussions.
Opportunities will be provided for students to reflect
upon experiences, to practice skills, and to apply new
learning through community and cultural change
projects. Students will be evaluated on their critical
thinking, analysis, and synthesis of the course goals
and objectives as demonstrated by participation
in class activities (responsiveness to required and
suggested readings and materials, guest and peer
generated discussion) and personal culture analysis
(personal reflection, self-evaluation).
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class limit:
15. Lab fee: $10

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

HS 1054 Climate Justice
STABINSKY, DOREEN
Climate change is one of the biggest and most difficult
challenges faced by contemporary societies. The
challenge has multiple facets: environmental, social,
political, economic—each with its own complexities.
This course focuses primarily on the social, political
and economic components of the climate problem,
framed by the concept of climate justice. In the
course students are introduced to basic conceptions
of justice, the latest findings of climate science
and possible impacts on regional scales, and the
global politics of climate change, principally in the
context of the UN Framework Convention on Climate
Change. Climate justice and its operationalization
is the principal organizing theme for work over the
term, addressing questions such as: how the costs of
climate change impacts and efforts to address climate
change could or should be distributed between rich
and poor, global north and global south; and what are
the possible means whereby those costs might be
addressed through collective action at various levels—
local, national, and global. Students will be evaluated
based on regular quizzes, several short papers, class
participation, and a final synthetic paper or project.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class limit:
25. Lab fee: $10. Meets the following requirements: HS

HS 1062 Problems and Dilemmas in
Bioethics
LAKEY, HEATHER
Bioethics studies ethical problems that occur in
medical practice and the life sciences. Contemporary
bioethics is an expansive and fundamentally
interdisciplinary field, but this course will consider
key dilemmas in bioethics from a philosophical
perspective. We will begin by reviewing dominant
ethical frameworks, including teleological ethics,
deontological ethics, utilitarianism, natural law
theory, and virtue ethics. Next, we will discuss specific
ethical issues such as, abortion, euthanasia and
physician-assisted suicide, life-sustaining treatments,
resource allocation, cloning, biotechnologies, animal
research, and informed consent, and the doctorpatient relationship. In particular, we will consider how
different ethical frameworks shape our assessment
of specific ethical dilemmas. My goal in this course
is to introduce students to the principles of ethical
thinking, to familiarize students with pressing debates
in bioethics, and to consider how ethical thinking
impacts our response to issues that are politically and
socially contentious. Course requirements include
class participation, an in-class presentation, a midterm
exam, and a final paper.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: none. Class
limit: 15. Lab fee: $30. Meets the following degree
requirements: HS

HS 1064 College Seminar: Practical Skills in
Community Development
BEARD, RONALD
In rural areas throughout the world, citizens,
nonprofit leaders, agency staff, and elected officials
are coming together to frame complex issues and
bring about change in local policy and practice. This
course outlines the theory and practice of community
development, drawing on the instructor’s experience
with the Dùthchas Project for sustainable community
development in the highlands and islands of Scotland,
Mount Desert Island Tomorrow, and other examples
in the literature. In short, community development
allows community members to frame issues, envision
a preferred future, and carry out projects that move
the community toward that preferred future. By using
writing as process—prewriting, writing, and rewriting—
to frame and communicate complex public issues,
students gain practical skills in listening, designing
effective meetings, facilitation, project planning and
developimng local policy. Readings, discussions, and
guests introduce students to community development
theory and practice. Class projects are connected to
community issues on Mount Desert Island. By writing
and revising short papers, students can reflect on
class content, community meetings, newspaper
stories, and reading assignments. Evaluation will be
based on preparation for and participation in class
discussion, several short papers, participation in
field work, and contribution to a successful group
project. This class meets the first-year writing course
requirement.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class
limit: 12. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree
requirements: W, HS

HS 1065 Philosophies of Good and Evil
LAKEY, HEATHER
Good and evil are timeless topics and they have
motivated centuries of philosophical thinking.
Although the terms “good” and “evil” are commonly
used across a range of discourses, they are
ambiguous, equivocal, and contested concepts. In
an effort to clarify our ideas about good and evil,
this course provides a broad overview of the issues,
arguments, and debates that shape philosophical
ethics. Guiding questions include the following: What
are the origins of good and evil? What makes an
action right or wrong? Why do we act morally? What
should we do with someone who commits a horrific
act? Who decides what counts as a horrific act? Is evil
an outdated or relevant concept? Do the concepts of
good and evil help or hinder moral thinking?
To critically explore the concepts of rightness,
wrongness, goodness, and badness, we will move
between fiction and philosophical treatises. We will
read works by key thinkers including St. Augustine,
Niccolo Machiavelli, Immanuel Kant, Friedrich

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

85

Nietzsche, Hannah Arendt, Jean-Paul Sartre,
Simone de Beauvoir, Flannery O’Connor, James
Baldwin, William Golding, Sherman Alexie, Rosalind
Hursthouse, and Cornel West. Along the way, we will
study deontology, utilitarianism, natural law ethics,
virtue ethics, ethical relativism, feminist ethics,
existentialism, and nihilism. In addition, we will unpack
the ethical arguments that orbit concrete topics such
as execution, murder, abortion, moral character, racial
injustice, pornography, prostitution, duties to animals,
and our duties to one another.
This course will familiarize students with the
influential frameworks of moral philosophy, and it will
encourage students to apply these frameworks to
specific moral problems. Students will be evaluated
on class participation, weekly writing assignments, a
midterm exam, a final paper, and a presentation.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None, but students
should be prepared to engage difficult, philosophical
texts and to discuss these texts in class. Class
limit: 15. Lab fee: $30. Meets the following degree
requirements: HS

HS 1073 Beginning Spanish I with
Vocabulary
PEÑA, KARLA
This course is for students who have some
acquaintance with general ideas, basic expressions,
and vocabulary of the Spanish language but lack
grammatical structures and development of the
basic language abilities of speaking, writing, and
listening comprehension skills. Objective: Students
will express themselves orally and through writing,
using vocabulary and simple construction of Spanish
in the indicative tense. This includes present tense
study, vocabulary, numbers, proper nouns, salutations
and presentations, present perfect tense, action
verbs, the use of “to be” and “is,” future tense,
vocabulary, and some use of “for.” Evaluation criteria:
two compositions, two auditory tests, two writing
tests covering grammar, two oral tests, assignments/
homework, class participation.
Level: Introductory. Offered every fall. Class limit: 10.
Lab fee: $20

HS 1075 Animals and Ethics
LAKEY, HEATHER
This discussion-based course will explore philosophical
and ethical questions pertaining to the relationships
between humans and non-human animals. We will
read a wide range of fiction, philosophical essays, and
ethical arguments in order to articulate and unpack
our beliefs, assumptions, and understandings of
animals, human-animal relations, and the implications
and consequences of the human-animal binary.
This course will focus on a wide range of theoretical
approaches, including the tradition of animals rights
86

and animal liberation as articulated by thinkers such
as Peter Singer, the growing field of animal studies
as represented by thinkers like Donna Haraway and
Kari Weil, as well as texts rooted in the tradition of
Continental philosophy which includes thinkers like
Derrida, Agamben, and Irigaray.
This course is premised on the following questions:
What are our moral obligations to other animals?
Should non-human animals have legal rights and moral
standing? If so, on what basis? How does the moral
treatment of animals change across the contexts of
food, research, captivity, and the home? Do we have
different ethical obligations to wild and domestic
animals? Historically, western philosophers construct
the “animal” in opposition to the human. Why? What
is an “animal” and why is the “human” contrasted
with it? How do we use the concept of the “animal”
to delimit our concept of the “human”? How does
language shape and produce our relationships with
animals? Upon complete of the course, students will
have refined their understanding of the concept of the
“animal” and they will be familiar with the key legal and
ethical debates regarding human-animal relationships.
Course requirements include class discussion, weekly
writing exercises, a midterm exam, and a research
project focusing on a human-animal relationship
somewhere in Maine. Students should come to this
class prepared to engage challenging philosophical
essays and to share their ideas with others.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class
limit: 12. Lab fee: $30. Meets the following degree
requirements: HS

HS 1076 College Seminar: Truth
COX, GRAY
What is the opposite of “fake news”? Does science
have the power—or the right—to tell us where we
came from or what the future of our climate will be?
Are there such things as universal human rights or
ethical norms that are independent of the prejudices
of individual people or cultures? Do intuitions or
emotions give us higher truths than rationality?
Can computers with Big Data discover truths that
are inaccessible to mere humans? This course will
explore these and related questions about what
“truth” might mean, what forms it might take, how
we might arrive at it, and how it might inform our
public politics and private lives. It will look at a mix of
classic and contemporary short texts that exemplify
good writing about these general questions. It will
also look at current cases and applications of these
ideas in the news of the day. Using a college seminar
format, the course will emphasize the writing process
to practice skills to formulate, thoughtfully analyze,
and revise views about these issues. The course goals
are to develop student skills in the critical analysis
of arguments and texts and to increase skills in
writing clear expositions and persuasive prose. It will

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

include some reading materials and in-class exercises
to explore alternative writing processes. Course
assignments will include brief homework activities,
short papers with revised versions of each, and one
longer research paper providing an extended revision
of an earlier piece. Students will be evaluated based
on the extent to which their class participation,
homework, and writing assignments demonstrate
substantive progress on the course goals. Class
sessions will alternate between seminar discussions,
short lectures, and peer review sessions of papers.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class
limit: 12. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree
requirements: HS, W

HS 1077 Ethnographic Writing
VAN VLIET, NETTA
Ethnographic writing, literally the “writing of a
people,” is anthropology’s primary disciplinary mode
of representation, based on participant-observation
fieldwork. Early ethnographies were usually written by
European and American anthropologists about people
they had studied in far away places. In the 1970s and
on, critical questions about representation began
to challenge assumptions about ethnographic work,
raising questions about objectivity, transparency, and
the relationship of the ethnographer to the people
and place about which they are writing. This class will
introduce students to a range of ethnographies in the
discipline of anthropology, as well as to the political,
cultural, and intellectual contexts in which these
ethnographies were produced. At the same time, we
will consider epistemological, ethical, philosophical,
and methodological issues that such writing involves,
including questions about representation and
interpretation. In addition to classic ethnographies,
we will also read some fiction, travel writing, and
journalism. We will consider questions about
how ethnographic knowledge is authorized, how
assumptions about interpretation shape ethnographic
writing, and the relationship between author and
reader. Students will be asked to experiment with
ethnographic writing themselves, through a series of
short writing assignments as well as a final project.
The course is designed to allow students to workshop
their own writing. Students will be evaluated on the
development and improvement of their own writing
over the course of the term, as well as on their ability
to critically evaluate and closely read ethnographies
as texts, and on their engagement with their peers’
writing, considering elements such as authorial
voice, the nature of characterization, and the overall
movement of a text.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class
limit: 12. Lab fee: $15. Meets the following degree
requirements: HS

HS 1084 College Seminar: Utopia/Dystopia

LAKEY, HEATHER
The practice of social dreaming has a long history in
philosophical thinking, stretching back to Hesiod and
Plato. What constitutes a perfect or ideal society?
Or, if no such place is possible, what makes for a
well-functioning society? Likewise, what constitutes
a terrible society? What kind of places and spaces
do we want to avoid? These are important questions
for human ecologists to ask as we seek to improve
our relationships with our natural, social, and
technological environments. To explore questions
of ideal and flawed places, this course studies the
concepts of utopia and dystopia across a range of
philosophical, political, and literary writings. Although
we will focus our attention on theoretical literature,
we will read several novels and short stories, and
students will present research on a work of utopian or
dystopian fiction.
Additional course questions include: What motivates
us to envision utopias and dystopias? Does political
philosophy require a utopian vision? What do utopias
and dystopias tell us about social fears, anxieties, and
hopes? Course readings will focus on classical Greek
thought, Enlightenment thought, political theory, and
critical theory. Texts may include Plato’s Republic,
Thomas More’s Utopia, Marx and Engels’ Communist
Manifesto, William Godwin’s Enquiry Concerning
Political Justice, Sigmund Freud’s Civilization and
Its Discontents, Charlotte Perkins Gilman’s Herland,
Octavia Butler’s Blood Child, Ursula K. LaGuin’s
The Ones Who Walk Away From Omelas, Hannah
Arendt’s The Origins of Totalitarianism, George
Orwell’s Nineteen Eighty-Four, and selections from
The Utopian Reader by Gregory Claeys and Lyman
Tower Sargent. Since this course is being offered as
a college seminar and will meet the first-year writing
requirement, we will focus on writing as process—
prewriting, writing, and rewriting. As students draft
bi-weekly writing assignments, they will meet with
the professor or TA either individually or as part of a
weekly writing lab. Papers will be peer reviewed and
each student will be expected to revise each paper. In
addition to bi-weekly papers, there will be an in-class
presentation, a midterm exam, and a final paper.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class
limit: 12. Lab fee: $30. Meets the following degree
requirements: HS, W

HS 1085 Introduction to Sexual Health
MAGNUSON, MADALYNNE
This multidisciplinary course will explore a breadth
of human sexuality topics drawing from public
health theories, prevention education practices,
feminist scholarship, and queer activism. Prevention
education promotes the knowledge, attitudes, and
skills necessary for a sexually healthy population and
seeks to prevent the spread of disease and violence.
In addition to educating individuals in how to engage

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

87

in health promoting behaviors, effective prevention
education takes into consideration cultures that
inhibit or facilitate health. Prevention education
supports policies, practices, and norms that create an
environment where all populations can thrive.
The World Health Organization defines sexual health
as, “a state of physical, emotional, mental and social
well-being in relation to sexuality; it is not merely the
absence of disease, dysfunction or infirmity. Sexual
health requires a positive and respectful approach
to sexuality and sexual relationships, as well as the
possibility of having pleasurable and safe sexual
experiences free from coercion, discrimination and
violence.” With this definition in mind we will discuss
topics including sexual health and reproduction,
sexual identity, intimacy, sensuality, and sexualization.
Sources of discussion may include the socialecological model of health, theories from 20th
century sex researchers such as William Masters and
Virginia Johnson, tactics of sexual health activists
such as ACT UP, feminist writers such as Audre Lorde,
and web-based sex education platforms such as
Afrosexology and Amaze. From discussions students
can expect to examine their personal attitudes, gain
up-to-date knowledge and resources, and grow their
skills for promoting sexual health in their lives and
communities. This course may be most helpful for
students interested in working in the fields of sexual
and interpersonal violence prevention, HIV prevention,
or reproductive health. Students will be evaluated
based on class participation, two papers, and a final
project. This is an online course and will be taught
using platforms for synchronous and asynchronous
discussions.
Level: Introductory: Prerequisites: None. Class Limit:
12. Lab Fee: None

HS 1086 The Poet’s Profession: An
Introduction to Poetry
LEWIS, RHIANNON
What kind of work is writing poetry? How do poets
construct verse through diction, imagery, and
technical elements? This introductory course traces
the development of the poetic vocation and poetic
form through Western literature. We will focus on how
poets writing in English from the 14th century onward
have worked to establish their profession, drawing on
classical tradition to define a new social and economic
role. We will also investigate how social, political,
economic, and linguistic developments, such as the
Industrial Revolution, Great Depression, movements of
the 1960s, and rise of internet culture, have informed
what it means to be a poet in our society. Reading
selections of poetry from medieval and early modern
periods through the present will enable us to study
how socioeconomics, race, gender, and assumptions
about the nature of work shape who has historically
been eligible for and excluded from the profession.
88

Evaluation is based on two short papers, weekly
response papers, and class participation. Students
are encouraged to consider poetry broadly, including
spoken word, song, and concrete poetry, and to
explore other national poetic traditions in assignments
and class discussions.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class limit:
12. Lab Fee: None

HS 1091 Introduction to Feminist Therapy:
Practices and Principles
GAGNON DA SILVA, PAMELA
Feminist therapy is focused on empowerment through
self-awareness and self-assertion as shaped by
an understanding of the larger social and political
constructs that influence our thoughts and behaviors.
In practice the application of feminist therapy
synthesizes tenets of gender-based psychology,
psychosocial theories of lifespan development,
multicultural analysis, and applied social change
activism with the objective of self evolution in relation
to personal, social, political, and cultural exchanges.
This course offers an overview of the origins and
applications of feminist therapy as a conceptual
framework developed in response to androcentric
therapies. We will begin by acknowledging the
forerunners of feminist therapy such as Karen Horney
and Leta Stetter Hollingworth. We will continue
studying the contributions of contemporary feminist
therapists such as Ellyn Kaschak, Lenore E. Walker,
Jean Baker Miller, and Laura Brown, including
prominent contributions by women of color in clinical
psychology such as the work of Ruth Winifred Howard
and Ellen Kitch Childs, and those who are currently
pioneering the development of women’s psychology
in other countries such as Vindhya Undurti. We
will explore the core principles of feminist therapy,
and the influences and implications of power and
gender biases at play in clinical practice throughout
assessment, diagnosis, and treatment. Students
will have the opportunity to learn about feminist
therapeutic techniques.
The objective of the course is to aid students in
developing a functional knowledge of feminist therapy
and its various clinical applications. Students who
have a desire to pursue psychotherapy and social work
are encouraged to consider this course as a means of
understanding the benefit of feminist therapy in the
development of egalitarian therapeutic relationships.
The class format includes lectures, roleplays, media
presentations, interviews with guest speakers, group
work, and discussions. Opportunities will be provided
for students to reflect upon experiences, to practice
skills, and apply learning through a community
project.
Students will be evaluated on their critical thinking,
analysis, and synthesis of the course goals and
objectives as demonstrated by participation in class

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

activities, responsiveness to required and suggested
readings as evidenced by successful completion
of course assignments, and active participation in
lecture-generated discussion.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: Introductory
Psychology and/or courses in Feminist Theory. Class
Limit: 15. Lab Fee: None

HS 1092 This Place Called India
TANEJA, PALAK
What is the first thing that comes to mind when
you hear the words “India,” “Bollywood,” “Curry,”
“Poverty?” The way we encounter a place/space and
form an opinion about it has a lot to do with the kind
of popular cultural representations that float around
with the power to perpetuate (or dispel) stereotypes.
Literature, for example, offers a fertile ground to
explore the idea of a place like India. Therefore, this
class will be your literary introduction to India in its
diversity. Students will be evaluated based on class
participation, along with written assignments and
a multimodal presentation. So, by producing wellthought-out and carefully researched responses,
movie reviews, presentations, and more, you will get
to engage with various aspects of India. We will be
studying works by Jhumpa Lahiri, William Dalrymple,
Anita Desai, among others. These literary texts and
additional materials like films, food, advertisements,
and newspaper reports will be a means to study the
politics of history, location, image, identity, diaspora,
gender, and (mis)representations. The main purpose
of this class is to help you use literature to develop
your own idea of this place called India.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: none. Class
limit: 12. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree
requirements: HS

HS 1094 Public Speaking Workshop
RAND, KENDRA
Consider all the ways that public speaking could
be a part of your academic and professional paths:
presenting your research; sitting on a webinar panel;
speaking up at ACM; advocating for an urgent cause
or policy; preparing your senior project presentation;
delivering a formal address at a special occasion; or
even deciding to perform spoken word at an open
mic. This course will prepare you to thoughtfully
analyze your audience, research and organize relevant
information, and deliver the critically important,
well-prepared presentation that you’re capable of.
Along the way we will be guided by, and critically
analyze, three varied and sometimes contradictory
premises: that it’s imperative to master the art of
formal, standard presentation/speech delivery; that
it’s equally important to respect and refine your own
unique, authentic voice and speech communication
style; and that important change happens when we

both listen carefully and speak up loudly. This class
will be conducted as a workshop with an emphasis on
students producing increasingly advanced speeches
for public performance and/or consumption. Students
will complete three graded, formal presentations
while also considering additional creative approaches
and formats for public communication. Students
will work with a variety of short texts and videos
to generate new ideas and helpful public speaking
habits. The real benefits of this course come from the
positive, supportive environment in which students
can practice new public speaking skills and learn from
each other. This class emphasizes a fun, dynamic,
hands-on approach to constructing speeches.
Students who feel that they are less proficient in the
area of public communication should not be worried
that this would somehow disadvantage them in terms
of their overall evaluation. All students, regardless
of their levels of comfort, experience, or and Englishproficiency are encouraged to consider this course.
This workshop is designed to help you improve your
public presentation skills regardless of whether you
are a complete novice to public speaking, or already
have many years of practice. Your final evaluation for
the course will be based on your engagement with the
process, not on some objective standard of who gave
the best speeches.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class limit:
14. Lab fee: None

HS 1095 Introduction to Postcolonialism
TANEJA, PALAK
This course will engage with postcolonialism as a field
of academic inquiry and culture critique in a globalized
world, especially as a tool to analyze postcolonial
literature. We seek to understand how multiple
histories and different aspects of colonialism inform
the content and form of the fiction we read and our
lives today. Postcolonialism, with its interdisciplinary
approach, offers a lens to look at imperial literature
and the new literature produced in the former
colonies of Africa, South Asia, the Caribbean, and
the like. The course will begin with a brief history
and exploration of the word “postcolonial” before
moving on to look at some of the significant issues
and intersections in the field, such as the questions
of language, nation, gender, and otherness, among
others. The texts by Chinua Achebe, Salman Rushdie,
Jean Rhys, accompanied by theorists like Frederic
Jameson, Aijaz Ahmad, and Gayatri Spivak, will create
a balance where we will use the theoretical pieces
as a lens to read and parse out the major and, in
some senses, representative postcolonial texts. You
will be evaluated on class participation and written
assignments like discussion posts, a book review, an
annotated bibliography, and a short paper.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class
limit: 12. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

89

requirements: HS

HS 1096 Introduction to Art Therapy
CHERMAK, HILARY
Not all people are able to talk about their feelings,
some people need to express them. Introduction to
Art Therapy is designed to introduce undergraduates
to the philosophical, pragmatic, and historical
foundations of the human service field of art therapy.
Art processes have been used successfully in almost
all psychotherapeutic contexts, ranging from work
with those who are severely ill to the facilitation
of mindfulness. Art therapy continues to grow in
communities to bring personal healing to mental,
emotional, and physical health concerns. Art therapy
is used in educational settings, hospitals, hospice,
corporations, and community art projects, especially
after traumatic events. The intellectual framework
and methodologies of art and psychotherapy will be
outlined and discussed within the course lessons.
Class discussions will stimulate integrated thinking
and provide a platform to reflect on personal growth.
Specific art directives will give you an opportunity
to be creative and strengthen your understanding of
art therapy. A weekly visual journal will be required
(prompts will be given). Lecture, discussion, audiovisual presentation, and experiential exercises
creating expressive art comprise the structure of
the class. Evaluations are based on two papers, class
presentations, participation and weekly visual journal,
and a final self-reflection.
Level: Introductory. Pre-requisites: None. Class limit:
15. Lab Fee: $35

HS 1097 Buddhist Philosophies
LAKEY, HEATHER
What is the nature of self? What is the nature of
mind? Why do we suffer? What is enlightenment?
This course introduces students to the foundations
of Buddhist philosophy and practice. Buddhism
encompasses a variety of different traditions,
teachings, practices, and goals. In this class, we
will adopt a philosophical perspective to explore a
range of Buddhist thinking on topics such as reality,
consciousness, nothingness, selfhood, and ethical
conduct.
We will begin by reading Asvaghosa’s Buddhacarita,
which tells the story of Siddhartha Gautama, the
historical Buddha. Next, we will study the Theravada,
Buddhism’s foundational structure, and then
proceed to explore the later Mahayana teachings.
This course will study primary literature, including
excerpts from the Pali Canon and several Mahayana
sutras, alongside selections from contemporary
thinkers such as Thich Nhat Hanh, angel Kyodo
williams, and Pema Chodron. Along the way, we will
discuss suffering (duhkha), emptiness (sunyata),

90

impermanence (anitya, non-self (anatman),
interdependence (pratityasamutpada), craving
and attachment (trsna) the four noble truths,
the eightfold path, liberation and enlightenment
(nirvana), action and causation (karma), wisdom
(prajna), compassion (karuna and bodhicitta), and our
responsibilities to other beings.
Over the course of the term, students will consider
the relationship between Buddhist philosophy
and Buddhist practice. To do so, students will be
introduced to different meditation practices through
a series of guest speakers and, depending on COVID
restrictions, a visit to a local Buddhist center. This
course will be conducted in seminar style with an
emphasis on class participation. No prior background
in Buddhism or philosophy is required. Course
requirements include an in-class presentation, weekly
writing assignments, a midterm essay, and a final
project.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class limit:
15. Lab fee: $25

HS 1098 Intercultural Communication
CHIEN, MING-TSO
Intercultural communication deals with the
communicative interactions of people and groups
across cultures. In this interdisciplinary course,
you will examine the communication factors within
intercultural encounters and consider topics including,
but not limited to: the significance and history of
intercultural communication studies; language,
identity, and culture; intercultural competencies;
power and ideology in intercultural communication;
intercultural conflicts and relationships; intercultural
communication in educational and other contexts.
The primary goals of this course are to: (1) raise your
awareness of intercultural communicative differences;
(2) provide you with the concepts, knowledge,
and skills to analyze, interpret, and respond to
different intercultural communicative processes
on the interpersonal, group, and/or organizational
levels. To accomplish these goals, the course will
introduce you to texts and other audiovisual materials
featuring narratives and scenarios of intercultural
communication; engage you in immersive and
interactive learning activities that will expose you to
others’ perspectives and experiences of intercultural
communication; equip you with the tools to develop
intercultural competence. Class sessions will
include some lectures but mostly consist of guided
discussions, activities, and presentations. Evaluations
will be based on individual and group projects
that involve intercultural interactions, interviews,
film screenings and discussions, and intercultural
competence workshops.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class limit:
15. Lab fee: $20

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

HS 1099 Introduction to Natural Resources
Management
MALTZ, ERICA
In this course you will gain a practitioner-level
framework for understanding regulatory, policy, and
collaborative mechanisms used to solve complex and
multi-jurisdictional ecological problems in the United
States. We will focus on the roles of tribal, federal
and state governments in the most current inland
fisheries and wildlife management issues. Through
weekly case studies you will analyze and evaluate
natural resources decision making and practice
policy analysis for the purpose of recommending
management decisions. We will address an array of
themes including, but not limited to, the alignment
of jurisdictions to collaboratively solve problems, the
role of tribal sovereignty in creating policy change,
the influence of nonprofits and the public, and political
extremism. The goals of this course are: 1) to provide
students with a practitioner-level framework for
natural resources management in the U.S. and 2) to
provide an opportunity for students to develop and
refine qualitative analytical skills. Students will be
evaluated based on weekly papers, participation, and
a final presentation. While this course is designed
specifically for students who are seeking a career in
natural resources, any students seeking to increase
understanding of natural resources decision making
are encouraged to enroll.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None Class limit: 15.
Lab fee: None

HS 1100 College Seminar: Writing the
Environment
CAPEN, JOHN
One day in the late spring of 1630, somewhere in
the North Atlantic, John Winthrop told his Puritan
congregation that, “We must consider that we shall
be as a city upon a hill. The eyes of all people are
upon us.” And so, days before the Arbella anchored
in what would become Boston Harbor and 146 years
before independence had been declared, American
Exceptionalism was born. Or was it? Eleven years
earlier, write the authors of The 1619 Project, “a ship
appeared [off] the British colony of Virginia. It carried
more than 20 enslaved Africans, who were sold to
the colonists. America was not yet America, but this
was the moment it began [and from it] grew nearly
everything that has made America truly exceptional.”
This seminar will examine the complex legacy of
the idea of American Exceptionalism through four
defining primary documents across four centuries:
A Model of Christian Charity (1630), Declaration of
Independence (1776), Gettysburg Address (1863),
and I Have a Dream (1963). We will also draw from
recent academic and popular works by Edward
Baptist, Isabel Wilkerson, Nikole Hannah-Jones,
James McBride, and Clint Smith, among others, that

will provide both historical and critical context to
help situate these texts and make sense of what they
mean for us today. Drawing from additional accounts
from various periods in US history, we will wrestle
with the contrasting narratives of identity and lived
experience to learn what they can tell us about the
past, present, and future of the United States, its
people, and its relationship to the rest of the world.
This is an introductory discussion based reading
seminar. Prior coursework or knowledge of United
States history is not necessary for taking the class.
Students will be evaluated on their contributions to
class discussions, short writing assignments, and a
final project, either individual or collaborative, which
we will develop during the term.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class limit:
14. Lab fee: None

HS 1101 American Exceptionalism: Land of
Liberty, Built on Slavery
BLAINE, JAMES
One day in the late spring of 1630, somewhere in
the North Atlantic, John Winthrop told his Puritan
congregation that “we must consider that we shall
be as a city upon a hill. The eyes of all people are
upon us.” And so, days before the Arbella anchored
in what would become Boston Harbor and 146 years
before independence had been declared, American
Exceptionalism was born. Or was it? Eleven years
earlier, write the authors of The 1619 Project, “a ship
appeared [off] the British colony of Virginia. It carried
more than 20 enslaved Africans, who were sold to
the colonists. America was not yet America, but this
was the moment it began [and from it] grew nearly
everything that has made America truly exceptional.”
This seminar will examine the complex legacy of
the idea of American Exceptionalism through four
defining primary documents across four centuries:
“A Model of Christian Charity” (1630), “Declaration
of Independence” (1776), “Gettysburg Address”
(1863), and “I Have a Dream” (1963). We will also draw
from recent academic and popular works by Edward
Baptist, Isabel Wilkerson, Nikole Hannah-Jones,
James McBride, and Clint Smith, among others, that
will provide both historical and critical context to help
situate these texts and make sense of what they mean
for us today. Drawing from additional accounts from
various periods in US history, we will wrestle with the
contrasting narratives of identity and lived experience
to learn what they can tell us about the past, present,
and future of the United States, its people, and
its relationship to the rest of the world. This is an
introductory discussion based reading seminar. Prior
coursework or knowledge of United States history is
not necessary for taking the class. Students will be
evaluated on their contributions to class discussions,
short writing assignments, and a final project, either
individual or collaborative, which we will develop
during the term.

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

91

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class limit:
14. Lab fee: None

of whether they have a previous background in
feminism, social theory, US history, or politics.

HS 1102 Equal Rights, Equal Voices:
Articulating Suffrage

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class
limit: 12. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree
requirements: HS, HY

MCKOWN, JAMIE

HS 2010 Literature, Science, and
Spirituality

This seminar will provide an in-depth exploration of
public speech texts by a wide array of 19th century
woman suffrage activists in the United States. This
includes works by those individuals most often
associated with the first wave of the movement
including: Susan B. Anthony, Elizabeth Cady Stanton,
Sojourner Truth, Frances Ellen Watkins Harper,
Ernestine Rose, Anna Dickinson, Lucretia Mott,
Victoria Woodhull, as well as other activists who
are generally less well known today. While this is
a course rooted in the history of what we might
consider early American feminism, it should come
as no surprise that, along the way, we will confront
issues that continue to have salience today. Many
of the topics surrounding gender, sex, identity,
equality, empowerment, and political allyship that
these activists wrestled with are still just as relevant
for us to consider in our contemporary context. This
is especially true when it comes to the topic of race
and the intersectional nature of the discourse around
gender equality, both then and now.

WALDRON, KAREN
A survey of Anglo-American literature from the
Scientific Revolution to the present. Focuses on
the ongoing debate about the role of science in
Western culture, the potential benefits and dangers
of scientific experimentation, the spiritual, religious,
social and political issues that come about with the
Ages of Discovery and Reason, and their treatment
in literature. Specific debates include concerns over
what is “natural,” whether knowledge is dangerous,
the perils of objectivity, and the mind/body dichotomy;
works include Shelley’s Frankenstein, Ibsen’s An
Enemy of the People, Brecht’s Galileo, Lightman’s
Einstein’s Dreams, and Naylor’s Mama Day as well as
short stories and poems. Writing-focused option.

We will spend time examining how the idea of race
was rhetorically constituted, in both exclusionary and
inclusionary ways, within these texts. We will also
look specifically at the works of early Black feminists
in the United States, and the myriad of ways they
navigated the challenges of the moment, especially
as they confronted a deeply embedded legacy of
white supremacy within the early woman suffrage
movement. Rather than rely primarily on secondary
historical accounts, there will be a heavy emphasis
on the close reading of primary source materials,
mostly speeches, as we encounter these speakers in
their own words. In addition, students will also take
part in hands-on recovery projects designed to locate,
transcribe, document, and make broadly accessible
works from the period that have been previously
undocumented or left unaccounted for. In doing so,
students will learn basic techniques for exploring and
making effective use of various types of digitized
historical collections that have emerged in recent
years.
Class sessions will be organized as a discussedbased seminar. Assignments will emphasize critical,
reflective, and analytical writing. Evaluation will be
based on participation in class discussion, short
written response papers, two longer form takehome essays, individual presentations, and a final
recovery project. Students interested in topics
related to gender, politics, historical research, and
activism are especially encouraged to enroll. This is an
introductory class and open to all students regardless
92

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisite: Writing
Seminar I. Offered every two or three years. Lab
fee: $10. Class limit: 15. Meets the following degree
requirements: HS

HS 2011 Nineteenth Century American
Women
WALDRON, KAREN
This course studies the American novel as written
by women of the 19th century. It focuses on how
women’s issues and styles changed over the course
of the century, with its revolutionary economic,
technological, social and political shifts, as well as on
enduring questions. As we read from among the wide
selection of 19th century American women novelists
(who outnumbered and outsold male authors)—such
as Rowson, Foster, Child, Cooke, Fern, Stowe, Phelps,
Jewett, Chopin, and Gilman—we consider how they
have shaped the tradition of the novel and social
values Americans encounter today.
Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites:
Writing Seminar I or signature of the instructor.
Offered every other year. Class limit 15. Meets the
following degree requirements: HS

HS 2020 Geographic Information Systems
I: Foundations and Applications
LONGSWORTH, GORDON
Ever-rising numbers of people and their impact on
Earth’s finite resources could lead to disaster, not
only for wildlife and ecosystems but also for human
populations. As researchers gather and publish more
data, GIS becomes vital to graphically revealing

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

the interrelationships between human actions and
environmental degradation. Much of what threatens
the earth and its inhabitants is place-based. Solutions
require tools to help visualize these places and
prescribe solutions. This is what GIS is about. Built
on digital mapping, geography, databases, spatial
analysis, and cartography, GIS works as a system to
enable people to better work together using the best
information possible. For these reasons, some level
of competency is often expected for entry into many
graduate programs and jobs, particularly in natural
resources, planning and policy, and human studies.
The flow of this course has two tracts, technical and
applied. The course begins with training in the basics
of the technology. Then, skills are applied to projects
that address real-world issues. Project work composes
the majority of course work and each student has the
opportunity to develop their own project. Because GIS
provides tools to help address many kinds of issues,
GIS lends itself well to the theory of thinking globally
and acting locally. Projects often utilize the extensive
data library for the Acadia region developed by
students since the lab was founded in 1988. The GIS
Lab acts as a service provider to outside organizations
and students can tap into the resources of a broad
network of groups and individuals working towards
a more sustainable future. Course evaluations are
partially based on the on-time completion of exercises
and problem sets. Most of the evaluation is based on
critique of student independent final project work and
related documentation.
Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Pre-requisites: Basic
computer literacy. Class Limit: 10. Lab Fee: $75

HS 2021 Immersion Practica in Spanish and
Yucatecan Culture
PEÑA, KARLA
This course is intended to provide students with an
immersion experience in the language and culture
of Spanish speakers in the Yucatán Peninsula. The
objectives are to increase their abilities to navigate
the linguistic and cultural terrain of another society in
sensitive, ethical, and effective ways. Class sessions,
visiting lecturers, field trips, and readings will provide
background on the history and anthropology of
Yucatecan culture. Immersion experiences and living
with a family will provide one important source of
experiential learning. A second will be provided
by an independent project or activity developed
for each student based on the student’s interests.
This independent project will include a practicum
experience in some institutional setting that might be
a class room (e. g. an art class at the local university),
a bakery, an internet café, a church group, or some
other place for social service or other work relevant
to a student’s interests. This practicum experience
will involve weekly activities during the term and more
intensive work during the last three weeks. Evaluation
will be based on participation in weekly class

discussions and on weekly reflective papers written in
Spanish.
Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Class limit: 12. Lab
fee: TBA

HS 2038 Gender, Politics, and Nature in
Folk/Fairy Tales of the World
TUROK, KATHARINE
Why do fairy tales capture the attention of adults
and children all over the world and endure in popular
literary and cinematic forms? What do they reveal
to psychologists, biologists, historians, linguists,
artists, anthropologists, and educators? Do they
politicize or de-politicize? socialize or subvert? What
is the postfeminist, postmodern response to the
Brothers Grimm? What do fairy tales convey about
animal behavior, entomology, and cosmology? How
might the tales shape human limitations, moral
values, and aspirations? This course will explore the
storytelling and retelling of literary, cultural, and
scientific stories from a comparative perspective,
imagining their interpretations and how they may
be retold with an eye toward new understandings of
human interrelationships, of a given sociohistorical
moment, the culture of COA, and the larger culture.
Students will read folklore and fairy tales, view
several films, and discuss essays by writers such
as Cristina Bacchilega, Bruno Bettelheim, Ruth
Bottigheimer, Michel Butor, Italo Calvino, Robert
Darnton, Claude Lévi-Strauss, Maria Tatar, and
Jack Zipes. Contemporary works by writers, visual
artists, and musicians inspired by traditional tales
will also be explored. Writers may include Margaret
Atwood, A.S. Byatt, Angela Carter, Robert Coover,
Michael Cunningham, Neil Gaiman, Tanith Lee,
Naguib Mahfouz, Haruki Murakami, Helen Oyeyemi,
Ludmilla Petrushevskaya, Francine Prose, and Anne
Sexton. Reflections may center on recurrent motifs
and patterns, and social, sexual, moral, scientific,
and political content, with emphasis on race, gender,
and class structure. Students will be evaluated on
two short papers, one creative project that may be
expressed in writing, visual art, music, or dance, and
a final written assignment in any genre—poems, plays,
fiction, or nonfiction.
Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Class limit: 15. Meets
the following degree requirements: HS

HS 2049 Marvelous Terrible Place: Human
Ecology of Newfoundland
TODD, SEAN
Where is the largest population of humpback whales
in the world, the largest caribou herd in North
America, the only confirmed Viking settlement in
North America, and Paleozoic water bottled for
consumption? The remote Canadian province of
Newfoundland and Labrador presents a stunning

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

93

landscape, an astoundingly rich ecological setting,
and a tragic history of poverty amidst an incredible
natural resource, the northern cod fishery, that
was ultimately destroyed. The province has been
alternately invaded or occupied by different groups
of Native Americans along with Norseman, Basques,
French, British, and the US military because of
its strategic location and rich fishing and hunting
grounds. One of the first and one of the last British
colonies, this richest of fisheries produced a very
class-based society, composed of a wealthy few urban
merchants and an highly exploited population of
fishing families often living on the edge of survival.
But within the past 50 years, Newfoundland society
has been forced to evolve. The provincial government
looks towards oil and mineral exploitation to turn
around the economy, while ex-fishermen consider
eco- and cultural tourism with growing ambivalence.
This then is our setting, and background, for an
intense examination of the human ecology of this
province; the relationship between humans and their
environment, sometimes successful, sometimes
otherwise, the struggle between the tenuous grasp of
civilization and this marvelous, terrible place. To do
this we will discuss various readings, examine case
studies and review the natural and human history of
this unique province. Our learning will culminate with
a two-week trip to Newfoundland to examine its issues
firsthand. Evaluation will be based on class and field
trip participation, responses to reading questions, a
field journal, and a final project.
Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites:
Signature of instructor. Lab fee: $850. Class limit: 14.
Meets the following degree requirements: HS

HS 2050 Religious Intolerance in the United
States
WESSLER, STEPHEN L
This course will examine bias directed at religions in
the contemporary United States. In this course we
will examine our own religious identities as well as
the stereotypes we have about religions. We will also
probe the level and impact of bias toward a number
of religions in the US, including Jehovah’s Witnesses,
members of the Church of the Latter Day Saints,
Catholics, members of new religious movements,
Jews, and Muslims. This course will address timely
and controversial issues including the relationship
between religion and laws and policies affecting the
LGBTQ population, immigration, and terrorism. Finally,
conflict resolution efforts both in Kosovo, aimed at
resolving tensions and violence between Albanian
Muslims and Serbian Orthodox Christians, and in
Northern Ireland, addressing animosity and violence
between Catholics and Protestants, will prompt a
discussion of approaches for reducing anti-religious
bias. Students will be evaluated on three papers (a
paper on each student’s religious or non-religious
identity, a research paper on a topic chosen by each
94

student, and an opinion editorial), class discussion,
and short written assignments relating to the readings
for the course.
Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: none.
Class limit: 15. Lab fee: None.

HS 2055 Writing Seminar II: Argumentation
STAFF
A logical sequence to Writing Seminar I, this course
emphasizes argument and persuasion. The assigned
readings show students not only how others
passionately and creatively argue points but how
argument and persuasion are integral to writing
effective papers on topics ranging from the need
to diversify the student body to protecting Atlantic
salmon. Like Writing Seminar I, this course also
requires library research and an understanding of
different forms of documentation.
Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None.
Offered every year. Class limit: 12. Meets the following
degree requirements: W

HS 2056 Constitutional Law: Civil Rights
and Liberties
SEDDIG, ROBERT
This course on US constitutional interpretation
focuses on civil rights and liberties, especially since
the Due Process Revolution of the 1960s, and will
emphasize the Bill of Rights and the 14th Amendment
using landmark Supreme Court decisions. Topics
include: speech, press, expressive conduct, religious
liberty, race- and gender-based discrimination,
personal autonomy (such as privacy and right to die),
reproductive rights, marriage equality, and the rights
of the accused. With sufficient enrollment, all students
will participate in a moot court (simulated Supreme
Court) decision, arguing a case currently pending
before the US Supreme Court. Student evaluation will
be based upon written quizzes, short papers, case
briefing (case summary writing), and the moot court
decision (either a lawyer’s brief or justice’s opinion).
This course is appropriate for students interested in
rights advocacy, rights activism, diversity studies,
public policy, and legal studies.
Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None.
Class limit: 15. Lab fee: None

HS 2057 Fail Better: Writing Short Fiction
MAHONEY, DANIEL
This course will serve as a workshop both for creating
our own short fictions as well as a forum for reading
and responding to work by established authors. As a
class we will get down to business: we will read and
discuss amazing short stories and amazing authors;
we will learn how to offer constructive criticism of
each other’s work; and we will write, we will write,

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

we will write. Class meetings will combine analysis of
published work with a discussion of how individual
writers approach their craft. We will study the conflict,
character, plot, and music of prose. The focus of
this class will be literary fiction. I define literary
fiction as work that is concerned not just with what
happened, but why it happened. It is character driven
and explores the motivations, desires, drives, and
consequences of the complex human experience.
It is the stuff of life. Representative authors: Jorge
Luis Borges, Julio Cortázar, Amelia Gray, Makoto
Kawabata, Gish Jen, Hemingway, Flannery O’Connor,
Milan Kundera, Mary Gaitskill, James Baldwin, Junot
Diaz. Students are expected to create four shorter
and one longer piece of fiction, respond to published
writers, lead weekly discussions, participate in class
response to fellow writers, and to revise their own
work in substantive ways.
Level: Introductory/Intermediate: Prerequisites: None.
Course limit: 12. Lab fee: None. Meets the following
degree requirements: HS

HS 2061 Indigenous America
LITTLE-SIEBOLD, TODD
This course will provide an introduction to the history
of indigenous peoples in the Americas. Using a
seminar style the class will combine some overview
lectures, student-led discusion of books and projectbased learning to provide an initial introduction to the
diverse histories of native peoples from Canada to
the Andes. The course will foucus on both pre-contact
societies as well as the processes of interaction
between Europeans and indigenous peoples in the
Americas. Using a selection of case studies the
course will highlight building an understanding of
indigenous worldviews as well as socio-political
organization and the ways both were trasnformed
by colonialism. A range of books will introduce
students to the ethnohistorical literature on native
communities from Mesoamerica, North America, and
the Andes. A simultaneous component of the course
will be student’s research projects on a topic of their
choosing that explores a dimension of native people’s
histories. Students will be evaluated on atendance,
course participation, short analytical essays, and their
final project.
Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: none,
however, students without any background in history
should expect to invest extra time with the reasings
and writing assignments. Class limit: 15. Lab fee: none.
Meets the following degree requirements: HS, HY

HS 2063 Hate Crimes in the Contemporary
US and Europe
WESSLER, STEPHEN L
Students will learn what causes bias-motivated
violence in schools and communities, how to develop

effective prevention strategies, how to reduce police
violence toward traditionally targeted groups, and
why hate crimes have such destructive impacts on
individuals and communities. The course will focus on
hate crimes and police and community response in the
US and in Europe. The students will examine their own
ethnic, racial, gender, sexual orientation and religious
identities as victims and/or perpetrators of bias and
violence. The course will examine bias and violence
in Europe toward traditionally targeted groups
such as LGBTQ, Muslim, Jewish, migrant, and Roma
people. Finally, the course will examine approaches
to reducing bias motivated violence by police toward
groups such as Blacks, Muslims, and Roma. Students
will be evaluated based on short written responses to
readings, in-class discussion, two papers, and a final
project. The final project will explore some aspect of
bias-motivated violence through persuasive writing,
fiction, poetry, art, photography/film, advocacy, or
interviews. Course readings will include scholarly
writing, reports from human rights NGOs, first-person
accounts, and one novel. Class sessions will involve
discussions led by me and at times by students, small
group discussions between students, and occasional
guest presenters. The class will travel to Portland or
Lewiston to meet with refugees from places in which
bias-motivated violence has been significant.
Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None.
Class limit: 15. Lab fee: None

HS 2071 Little Magazines: Seminar in
Contemporary Literary Publishing
MAHONEY, DANIEL
This course is an introduction to literary magazines
and the work of editing. We will examine the history
of “little” magazines from the mid 19th century to
the present day. We will investigate the impact of
literary magazines on literary culture in America
and the world. This class will also be dedicated to
surveying the current literary landscape, both print
and digital, with special emphasis on BATEAU, the
literary magazine published at College of the Atlantic.
Through the production of BATEAU, the course will
offer practical experience in literary publishing:
students will gain experience in editing, layout, and
production, as well as publicizing and promoting
the finished product. Students will be expected to
respond to course readings on literary magazines
and culture as well as keep detailed response notes
to submissions to the magazine. Student editors will
recommend pieces for publication, rejection, and/or
further consideration. In addition to editorial duties,
students will be expected to complete a midterm and
final project.
Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites:
Writing Seminar and a creative writing or literature
class. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: None

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

95

HS 2072 Sex, Gender, Identity, and Power

HS 2076 Life Stories: Memory, Family, and
Place

LAKEY, HEATHER
This course offers an overview of feminist and queer
thinking. The purpose of this course is two-fold. First,
it will provide a snapshot of the ideas, traditions, and
debates that shape feminist and queer philosophy.
Second, this course will teach students to critically
interrogate the meaning of sex, gender, sexuality,
power, and oppression. Along the way, we will consider
a host of arguments regarding the sources of sexism,
racism, and heteronormativity, the grounds of sexual
dimorphism, and the relationship between subjectivity
and oppression. Although this course will stress the
many ways feminist theory and queer theory overlap,
we will also consider the emergence and development
of queer philosophy as a distinct and unique discipline.
Some of the principal questions for this course
include: Which categories are used to study the human
being and when are these categories potentially
oppressive or violent? When is language a mechanism
for social and political oppression and when does
language facilitate liberation? How do multicultural,
intersectional, transgender, and queer approaches
inform feminist politics? How do queer philosophers
challenge the theoretical orthodoxies of identity,
gender, and sexuality? Students will be evaluated on
weekly writing assignments, a presentation, a midterm
exam, and a final paper. This will be a discussiondriven course and students should be prepared to
engage and discuss philosophical literature.
Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None.
Class limit: 15. Lab fee: $25

One of the deepest human instincts is to tell our life
stories, to figure out who we are. This course will
use a workshop approach with a particular focus on
memoir writing rooted in an exploration of family and
place. We will study the writing process and matters
of craft by reading and responding to memoirs by
contemporary writers (e.g., Terry Tempest Williams’
When Women Were Birds: Fifty-Four Variations on
Voice), practical guides to memoir writing (e.g.,
Bill Roorbach’s Writing Life Stories), and essays on
memoir and memory (e.g., Patricia Hampl’s I Could
Tell You Stories: Sojourns in the Land of Memory).
Class time will include discussion of readings, writing
exercises designed to help students with matters
of language and technique in their own writing, and
group critiques of work-in-progress. Student work
will be publicly shared through a reading and exhibit
on campus. Students will be evaluated on the effort
and quality of their writing, their commitment to the
writing process, their participation in peer review and
workshops, a final portfolio of all their writing, and a
public presentation of their finished work.
Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None.
Class limit: 12. Lab fee: $20

HS 2078 College Seminar: City/Country in
U.S. Literature 1860-1920
WALDRON, KAREN
One of the deepest human instincts is to tell our life
stories, to figure out who we are. This course will
use a workshop approach with a particular focus on
memoir writing rooted in an exploration of family and
place. We will study the writing process and matters
of craft by reading and responding to memoirs by
contemporary writers (e.g., Terry Tempest Williams’
When Women Were Birds: Fifty-Four Variations on
Voice), practical guides to memoir writing (e.g.,
Bill Roorbach’s Writing Life Stories), and essays on
memoir and memory (e.g., Patricia Hampl’s I Could
Tell You Stories: Sojourns in the Land of Memory).
Class time will include discussion of readings, writing
exercises designed to help students with matters
of language and technique in their own writing, and
group critiques of work-in-progress. Student work
will be publicly shared through a reading and exhibit
on campus. Students will be evaluated on the effort
and quality of their writing, their commitment to the
writing process, their participation in peer review and
workshops, a final portfolio of all their writing, and a
public presentation of their finished work.

HS 2074 Philosophy of Death and Dying
LAKEY, HEATHER
This course philosophically explores the concepts
of death, dying, killing, and life. Topics include the
soul, the afterlife, euthanasia, physician-assisted
suicide, evolving medical definitions of life and
death, hospice and end-of-life care, the ethics
of killing, biotechnologies, and cross-cultural
conceptions of death and grief. Although this course
is primarily grounded in the Western philosophical
and bioethical traditions, we will also consider nonWestern perspectives in an effort to both clarify and
complicate our conceptions of death and dying. The
purpose of this course is not to articulate conclusive
answers, but rather to compel students to think
philosophically about the many profound questions
that arise in the face of death. This is a discussionbased course and students should be prepared
to engage and discuss challenging philosophical
literature. Students will be evaluated on the basis of
weekly writing assignments, a midterm, a final, and
class participation.
Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites:
None. Class limit: 15. Lab fee: $30. Meets the following
degree requirements: HS
96

DONOVAN, MARTHA

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None.
Class limit: 12. Lab fee: $20

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

HS 2081 Postcolonialism and
Psychoanalysis
VAN VLIET, NETTA
The course considers the definition of the human by
bringing together the field of postcolonial studies
with the field of psychoanalysis. Both postcolonial
studies and psychoanalysis engage questions of
sexualized and racialized difference in the context of
20th century Europe and the legacies of colonialism.
Postcolonial studies and psychoanalysis both also
contend with notions of individual and collective wellbeing, with belonging and exclusion.
Psychoanalysis is a colonial discipline which produced
a form of analysis that emerged in the time of
colonialism. As such, psychoanalysis contributed to
colonial notions of civilized and primitive, of man
and woman, of normal and abnormal, of Europe and
its others. At the same time, however, contexts of
anticolonial struggle in turn shaped psychoanalytic
thought. By examining texts central to these two
fields, this course considers how psychoanalytic
thought can help us understand the processes
through which individuated subjects become defined
in terms of collective groups of belonging such as the
nation, and how filiation and family is connected to
affiliation and nation through relations of affect and
concepts of representational politics.
We will begin with an introduction to the inception of
psychoanalysis in Europe, and examine how it travels
and is taken up in Europe’s colonies. Drawing on
postcolonial theory and literature, we will learn about
the historical emergence of the term “postcolonial,”
the political and disciplinary debates to which the
term gave rise, and its relation to ideas of nationalism,
diaspora, and Orientalism. Geographically, we will
examine examples of anticolonial struggle in Algeria,
India, and Palestine/Israel. Readings will focus
on texts by Sigmund Freud, Jacques Derrida, the
Subaltern Studies group, and scholars who directly
engage with these thinkers, including Jacques
Lacan, Frantz Fanon, Edward Said, and Gayatri
Spivak. Students will be evaluated based on class
participation, reading responses, a midterm essay and
final paper.
Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites:
Prior coursework in literature, anthropology, or
related fields recommended; permission of instructor
required. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: $10. Meets the
following degree requirements: HS

HS 2083 Introduction to Journalism:
Telling the Story
LEVIN, ROBERT
This course guides students to produce interesting,
accurate, well-written, compelling articles about
people, processes, and events. The course aims to
give students an understanding of the principles of

American journalism, the structure of journalistic
writing, the techniques for identifying, sourcing, and
gathering information, and insight into how news is
disseminated and read, watched, or listened to in the
digital age.
Students will produce several short articles for the
course, learning the basics of story development,
interviewing, research, and covering meetings and
events. Students will be tasked with thinking critically,
understanding and using news judgment, working
collaboratively and on their own, and developing
skills for efficiency and self-critique. They will be
introduced to the history of American journalism, the
ethics and laws specific to the field, and the modern
media landscape. Students will also learn about and
practice photo journalism. A final project in the course
will include significant research, along with the other
skills in interviewing, observation, and documentation
learned over the term.
Students will be evaluated on the following criteria:
the quality of their reporting, the effectiveness of
their revisions, and participation in class discussions
and peer review sessions.
Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites:
Permission of instructor. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: None.
Meets the following degree requirements: W

HS 2084 European Political Institutions
STABINSKY, DOREEN
The European Union is a fascinating, ongoing
experiment in international cooperation. Currently,
27 countries have joined together in a supra-national
political and economic union, creating a political
entity unique to a world of sovereign individual
nation-states. This course focuses on understanding
this complex and evolving union through study of its
main political institutions: the European Council of
Ministers, the European Parliament, and the European
Commission. We will look at the workings of and
functional relationships between these institutions
through readings, meetings with politicians,
bureaucrats, and NGOs involved in European-level
politics, and visits to each of the institutions during
two weeks in Brussels. We will also spend some time
in the course looking at the broader political and
cultural context in which the institutions operate,
through examination of several important current
topics in European politics. Topics could include:
refugees and migrants in Europe, the reauthorization
of the Common Agricultural Policy, Brexit, the rise
of right-wing movements across countries in the EU.
Students will be evaluated based on participation in
class discussions, a reflective journal kept during their
time in Brussels, and a presentation and final essay on
a current EU-relevant political issue of their choosing.
Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: Prior
French language instruction, permission of instructor,
and co-enrollment in 2-cr HS6015 Immersion Program

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

97

in French Language and Culture. Class limit: 12. Lab
fee: 0. Meets the following degree requirements: HS

readings and exercises, we explore issues such as
nutrition, worker safety, contested agricultural
and land use policies, hunger, and environmental
and community health. The second part of the
course examines case studies of transformative
food movements around the world, from the Zero
Hunger programs in Belo Horizonte, Brazil, to La Via
Campesina global campaign for agrarian reform.
We focus particularly on food sovereignty and
agroecology movements. The final third of the course
focuses on transformative work in Maine and at COA.
Students take multiple field trips to participate in local
movements and to learn about their philosophies,
objectives, and activities. By the end of the course,
students will be able to analyze how power shapes
food systems and articulate a theory of change for
addressing a food systems problem of their choice.
Students are evaluated based on participation in
class discussions and field trips, a series of reflection
papers, and a final project including a paper and an
audio-visual presentation.

HS 2086 Politics and the Supreme Court
SEDDIG, ROBERT
The US Supreme Court has been called “the most
powerful court in the world,” and yet the founders
regarded the judiciary as “the least dangerous
branch” of government, exercising “neither force nor
will, but merely judgment” (Alexander Hamilton). This
seminar will examine the three branches of the US
national government, with its primary focus on the
Supreme Court. We will assess the relations among
the branches at the beginning of the 21st century,
asking whether separation of powers and “checks
and balances” exist today. Added focus on executive
authority (including the increased use of executive
orders by the President) and legislative powers
(often under conditions of stalemate). Is the Supreme
Court supreme in its power? What does it do? Does
the Supreme Court “interpret the law?” Does it, in
fact, make public policy, by mediating conflicts over
values and power at the national level? Was Hamilton
“wrong” in his projection of its role in American
national government? The Supreme Court in recent
years has been at the storm center of protracted
disputes on segregation, abortion, affirmative
action, marriage and partnering, free exercise of
religion, and the death Peñalty. Can the court resolve
these national disputes more easily than other
governmental institutions? And, if so, why? Is the
Supreme Court resolution of disputes circumventing
our democratic institutions?

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None.
Class limit: 14. Lab fee: None. Meets the following
degree requirements: HS

HS 2092 Race and Racism in America: A
Very Short History
LITTLE-SIEBOLD, TODD

This seminar seeks to improve our understanding
of how the Supreme Court functions and to develop
our analytic skills about rival claims of liberal or
conservative ideologies at work. Main topics include:
judicial politics and appointments, jurisdiction,
standing, collegial decision-making, adhering to
or undermining key precedents, judicial activism
and restraint, and the impact of judicial holdings.
Evaluation will be based upon class participation, two
short papers, and a research-based term paper.
Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None.
Class limit: 15. Lab fee: None. Meets the following
degree requirements: HS

HS 2087 Transforming Food Systems
COLLUM, KOURTNEY
This course explores possibilities for transformative
change across local and global food systems. The
course centers on the question: What would it take to
ensure access to healthy, safe, affordable, culturally
appropriate foods for all people? The first part of the
course critically examines capitalist food systems with
particular attention to the ways culture, politics, and
economics shape our interactions with food. Through

98

This readings seminar will explore the history of race
thinking and structural forms of power in America
from the earliest settlement of the hemisphere by
Europeans to the 20th century. We will emphasize the
specific mechanisms of power used to produce and
reproduce the ideas and institutions that oppressed
African Americans, Native Americans, and “ethnics”
over the course of the country’s history. As a nation
built on slavery, racial discrimination, and white
supremacy, the United States provides a unique
vantage point from which to examine the workings
out of the strange ideologies of difference that took
root in the New World. The class will explore a wide
range of histories from the origins of slavery in the
17th century as a solution to “the problem of the
poor” to the inclusion of Irish, Jewish and others in
the category of “white” in the 20th. A key aspect of
the course will be examining the construction and
workings of whiteness. The seminar will be based
on discussion of key texts in the scholarship of
race and racism in the United States, and students
will lead those discussions. Other core work of the
class will be mastering the complex arguments and
evidence used to reveal the inner workings of white
supremacy through readings, analytic writing, and
an independent project. The course is intended for a
wide range of students willing to dig in to the work of
reading extensively about a contentious topic to form
their own historical analysis of the past. Evaluation will
be based on discussion, mastery of the readings, short
analytic writing, and a final project.

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None.
Lab fee: None. Class limit: 15. Meets the following
degree requirements: HS

HS 2096 Nature, Humans, and Philosophy
LAKEY, HEATHER
According to COA’s website, human ecology studies
the relationship between humans and their natural,
cultural, built, and technological environments. But
what do we mean by “nature” and what distinguishes
a natural environment from a cultural one? Moreover,
what kind of relationships should we cultivate with
our natural environments? This discussion-based
course offers a philosophical and ethical exploration
into the concept of nature. We will draw on a variety
of readings from environmental ethics, ecofeminism,
deep ecology, American philosophy, Taoism, and
Poststructuralism in order to critically interrogate
our understanding of nature, as well as our ethical
beliefs regarding human responsibility to the natural
world. We will read selections from thinkers such as
Aristotle, Carolyn Merchant, Ralph Waldo Emerson,
Ramachandra Guha, Aldo Leopold, John Muir, Arne
Naess, Val Plumwood, Kate Soper, Mark Sagoff,
Vandana Shiva, Gary Snyder, Henry David Thoreau,
Lao Tzu, Terry Tempest Williams, and others.
In the first half of the course, we will examine
different philosophical frameworks that theorize
the idea of nature and environmental responsibility.
Guiding questions include the following: What is
“nature?” How is the concept of nature politicized and
socially constructed? Do we have moral obligations
to nature? How should humans relate to nature?
What assumptions drive the conceptual distinction
between humans and nature? During the second half
of the course, we will pivot our attention to specific
ethical topics such as: control over natural resources,
environmental justice, the land ethic, rights for
non-human objects, wilderness, sustainability, and
consumption. Throughout the course, we will revisit
questions pertaining to philosophy and environmental
activism, and we will consider how philosophy can
help us to articulate our ethical responsibilities to our
natural environments.
Upon completion of this course, students will have
gained a richer philosophical understanding of the
idea of nature and they will be familiar with key
debates in environmental ethics. Course requirements
include weekly writing assignments, a midterm exam,
a final paper, and class participation. There are no
prerequisites, but students should arrive to this class
prepared to engage difficult philosophical texts and to
share their ideas with others.
Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites:
None. Class limit: 15. Lab fee: $30. Meets the following
degree requirements: HS

HS 2097 Fiction Writing: Crafting
Believable Characters
CASS, BLAKE
By gaining exposure to theatrical techniques, students
will learn how to craft bold works of fiction with rich,
believable characters. Drawing on the work of theatre
practitioners such as Sanford Meisner and Viola
Spolin, this activity-based course will involve daily
individual and collaborative writing exercises that
teach students to orient themselves within fictional
worlds through heightened sensory awareness and
instill a practice of exploring character through
desires and objectives. The goals are to provide a
set of tools that enable students to express the inner
complexity of a wide-range of characters through
action and nuanced, realistic dialogue.
This is a writing-intensive course. Short writing
assignments will challenge students to put into
practice the techniques we have experimented with
in class, and each student will craft two short stories
that will be workshopped and revised. In addition, we
will read between 10-15 short stories, and students will
compose weekly reading responses that allow them to
examine how character development relates to other
fictional strategies such as plot, backstory, point of
view, and tone. Evaluation is based on participation in
class activities, successful completion of all minor and
major writing assignments, and the ability to provide
constructive feedback during workshop experiences.
Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites:
Permission of instructor. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: None

HS 2098 Introduction to Philosophy of Mind
JACOBY, FRANKLIN R
What is the mind and how does it relate to the body?
This two-part question will guide the structure of
this introductory course in the philosophy of mind.
Other questions that will arise include how can the
mind influence the body? Is this distinction between
mind and body deep? Is there a single discipline that
can tell us what the mind is and, if not, why not? Is
science of help? What strategy or method is best
suited to understanding the mind? Do other cultures
or religions offer insight? Is the mind inherently
mysterious and unknowable?
Attempts to understand the mind have vexed and
stimulated philosophers, scientists, and others since
at least as far back as Descartes. Starting with his
work, we’ll explore classic and contemporary texts in
western thought, with particular focus on philosophy,
but with some psychology, neuroscience and nonWestern thought. We will cover a number of theories
and our own assumptions about this basic and
fundamental feature of human life. Some of the main
accounts students will gain familiarity with include
dualism, materialism, panpsychism, emergence,
and phenomenology. Evaluation will be based on

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

99

participation, two short response essays, a midterm
essay, a final essay, and a final presentation.

Class limit: 15. Lab fee: None

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None.
Class limit: 15. Lab fee: None

HS 2107 Indigenous Peoples, Climate
Change, and Power
FAIRBANK, CHELSEA

HS 2103 Writing for Nonprofits
LEWIS, RHIANNON
This course is designed for students who are
interested in nonprofit organizations and want to
become strategic and effective communicators in
this setting. We will learn to compose clear, concise,
and compelling materials that meet the varied
communication needs typical of nonprofits. Through
analyzing the writing of nonprofits, investigating case
studies and sector trends, and producing a portfolio
of original materials, we will gain an understanding of
the common genres of nonprofit writing and develop
skills needed to support a successful mission-driven
organization. In addition to writing for multiple
audiences and communication channels, students will
practice selecting appropriate imagery and creating
content collaboratively. Students are encouraged to
pursue a service-learning opportunity by working with
a local nonprofit organization. Evaluation is based on
class participation and successfully completing four
short writing assignments (options include a mission
statement, case for support, fundraising letter,
brochure, talking points, press release, and content
marketing piece) and one longer project, such as a
grant proposal, report, or study.
Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites:
Permission of instructor. Class Limit: 12. Lab fee: None.
Meets the following degree requirements: W

HS 2106 The Power of Debt

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None.
Class limit: 15. Lab fee: None

STIVERS, ABBY J.
Is having debt good or bad? Is having credit card debt
worse than having student loans, and if so why? Why
are home mortgages usually set up over the course
of 30 years? If a country paid to educate you, do you
“owe” them? Are you indebted to your parents and,
if you are, should you pay them back in money or in
some other way? These are some of the questions
that will be explored in this class. This course will
cover interpretations of the rise of money, the social
power of debt (both monetary and other), and the
disconnect between the ways in which people think
about debt and the way households and companies
actually use it and the function debt plays in the
economy. This course will use both sociological
and anthropological readings to inform your
understanding of the connections between money
and meaning. Successful completion of this course will
depend heavily on completing the weekly readings.
Evaluation will be based on course participation and
three short papers.
Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None.
100

This course introduces students to some of the critical
environmental issues Indigenous peoples face in
Maine and throughout North America due to climate
change and environmental injustice. Students will
explore theories of structural power and colonization,
as well as case studies examining the legal
recognition of Indigenous peoples, and their lands, by
contemporary governments. These historical forces,
and their effects on current environmental, political,
and legal logics will be critically analyzed while also
exploring various legal and political strategies applied
by Indigenous nations as they adapt to climate change
and participate in the global policy response to our
changing climate. Students will have the opportunity
to deepen their understanding of traditional
ecological knowledge and Indigenous science in
relation to climate effects on natural resource
conditions, as well as climate justice resistance and
resilience movements. Through rethinking colonialism,
the course will deconstruct contemporary issues
of climate change while analyzing some of the
ideological and structural logics that perpetuate
environmental devastation, its disproportionate
impacts on Indigenous peoples globally, and the local
and Indigenous movements who are dynamically
changing the narrative around resistance, justice, and
knowledge. Students will be evaluated based on class
participation, a series of synthesis papers, a student
designed mini-ethnographic project, and a final
research proposal and paper.

HS 2109 Rethinking the Canon: Self,
Others, and Philosophy
LAKEY, HEATHER
How do “philosophies born of struggle” (Leonard
Harris) change, disrupt, and advance the discipline of
philosophy? Academic philosophers have historically
studied a select group of thinkers, most of whom are
white men from Europe. European philosophers offer
wonderfully rich arguments, but like all perspectives,
theirs are partial and limited. To explore foundational
philosophical questions, this course will read canonical
European philosophers alongside scholars who
engage with this canon from a diverse set of cultural,
political, and historical contexts, such as Indigenous
studies, Africana philosophy, Latin American
philosophy, postcolonial studies, and feminist theory.
Along the way, we will read essays that analyze the
concept of “the canon,” and we will consider how
different theoretical interventions advance the

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

discipline of philosophy.
To rethink the canon, this course will center on
four philosophical questions: What is the self or
subjectivity? What is the relationship between
self and other? What makes someone a good or
virtuous person? How do different linguistic forms
(propositional, poetic, narrative) shape our thinking
about reality and relationships? For each set of
questions, we will pair texts from different historical
and cultural contexts. Possible philosophers include
Gloria Anzaldúa, Charles Mills, W.E.B Du Bois, Henry
Odera Oruka, Kwasi Wiredu, Ofelia Schutte, René
Descartes, Kris Sealey, Alain LeRoy Locke, David
Hume, Immanuel Kant, Frantz Fanon, Maria Lugones,
Plato, John Locke, Brian Yazzie Burkhart, Friedrich
Nietzsche, Simone de Beauvoir, Winona LaDuke,
Judith Butler, Kwame Gyekye, Jean Paul Sartre,
Oyèrónké Oyèwùmí, and Kathryn Sophia Belle. Course
requirements include four three-page papers, a
presentation, and a final paper.

the borders but also writing as a process—prewriting,
writing, and rewriting. This course meets the writing
requirement.
Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: Some
knowledge about world history and experience in
writing about literature would help. Class limit: 12. Lab
fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements:
HS, W

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisite: Prior
work in philosophy will be helpful, but not required.
Class limit: 15. Lab Fee: $30. Meets the following
degree requirements: HS

HS 2110 College Seminar: Barbed Wires,
Drawn Lines
TANEJA, PALAK
How many times have you mused about the idea
of borders? What do the lines that divide us mean,
and how are we to make sense of them? Literature
has always been a place where questions like these
have been thought aloud. Whether the borders
are geographical or metaphorical, whether they
keep people out or fence people in, borders are
liminal spaces that raise questions about politics,
oppression, belongingness, and identity, which makes
them an important subject for our interrogation.
Since these literatures are born of political events,
our first concern will be to understand the history
of the events themselves. We will achieve that by
reading excerpts from the works of Gyanendra
Pandey, Stanley Waterman, Joe Cleary, and others in
juxtaposition with literature. In addition, the literary
works by Saadat Hasan Manto, Seamus Deane, Gloria
Anzaldúa, and the like will help put the bigger picture
in perspective bringing in various thematic concerns
like religion, violence, language, and gender together.
This class will thus explore two types of borders:
one that course texts evoke, helping you critically
engage with the theme; and the other kind, which
exists between various genres you will encounter like
short stories, novels, literary theory, official reports,
and movies. The latter, coupled with your writing
assignments that we will workshop throughout the
term—personal narrative, online article, movie review,
multimodal project, and others—will facilitate and
deepen your understanding not only of literature from
COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

101

HS 2111 Queer Literature

HS 2113 Latin American Literature: Pablo
Neruda—Residencia En La Tie

LEWIS, RHIANNON
This course traces the development of queer literature
from the 16th century to the present. We will read
selected texts written in English, including poetry,
drama, and novels, that involve sexual and gender
identities other than straight and cisgender. Selections
from queer theorists, such as Michel Foucault, Judith
Butler, Eve Sedgwick, and Gloria Anzaldúa, will frame
our analysis of works by writers such as Christopher
Marlowe, Aphra Behn, Walt Whitman, Leslie Feinberg,
Audre Lorde, and Ocean Vuong. We’ll explore what
constitutes a genre of literature (specifically, queer
literature) by identifying themes, tropes, and other
defining characteristics. Questions we’ll address
include: what makes a work of literature “queer?”
Does the writing of a queer-identifying author
automatically become part of this tradition? Can a
piece of literature be “queer” independent of the
author’s identity? How does queerness intersect with
other identities, including race and socioeconomic
status? What is the social and political importance
of queer literature? Evaluation will be based on class
participation and weekly response papers, one long
paper, and one short, final paper.
Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None.
Class limit: 12. Lab fee: None

Residencia en la Tierra can be translated in many
different ways: A residency on Earth, residence
on Earth, living on Earth. However, each distinct
translation points us toward a single question: What
does it mean to be at home on Earth? This is an
introduction, in English translation, to the person
considered by many to be the greatest Latin American
poet of the 20th century, Pablo Neruda. Neruda’s
poetry is marked by a series of aesthetic and political
metamorphoses as he continually seeks to address
the aforementioned question in his early love poems,
political poems, sweeping historical works, odes, and
nature poems. Like each of us, Neruda was a witness
to history, and special attention will be devoted to that
history, particularly in terms of the Spanish Civil War,
The Cold War, and the Chilean coup. We will look at a
broad selection of Neruda’s poetry, historical texts,
as well as texts on literary translation. Students will
be expected to complete weekly responses to class
readings, group projects, a midterm drafted essay,
and a final of the student’s own design.
Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None.
Class limit: 12. Lab fee: None

HS 3015 African American Literature

HS 2112 Midnight’s Children

WALDRON, KAREN

TANEJA, PALAK

This survey of African American literature from its
origins in the slave narrative to the present vivid
prose of some of America’s best writers considers
the impact of slavery and race consciousness on
literary form and power. Readings include letters,
essays, poems, short stories, and novels of some
of the following authors: Phillis Wheatley, Frederick
Douglass, Harriet Jacobs, Pauline Hopkins, Langston
Hughes, Richard Wright, Zora Neale Hurston,
Gwendolyn Brooks, Ralph Ellison, Toni Morrison.

“Only by unleashing the fictionality of fiction, the
imaginativeness of the imagination, the dream
songs of our dreams, can we hope to approach the
new, and to create fiction that may, once again, be
more interesting than the facts”—Salman Rushdie,
Ask Yourself. Nobody exemplifies these notions
better than Rushdie himself. Therefore, this course
will be an exploration of the fantastical world of
Salman Rushdie through his seminal novel Midnight’s
Children. Deemed as one of the Great Books of the
20th century, which won the Booker prize the year of
its publication, 1981, and the Booker of Bookers twice
over (in 1993 and 2008), the novel is a prime example
of postcolonialism with a magical realist twist.

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisite: A previous literature
course or signature of the instructor. Class limit: 15.
Offered every other year. Meets the following degree
requirements: HS

In this class, we will take a deep dive into Rushdie’s
novel by paying close attention to the prose and his
style and the history and contexts that he sets up in
this novel. Therefore, the reading of the novel will
be supplemented with historical background and
literary criticism that bring up questions of utopia,
nation, politics, identity, and subalternity, to name a
few. You will be evaluated on class participation and
written assignments like discussion posts, an oral
presentation, a paper, and a final project.

HS 3022 Intermediate Spanish II
PEÑA, KARLA

Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None.
Class limit: 15. Lab fee: None. Meets the following
degree requirements: HS

102

MAHONEY, DANIEL

This course is for students who use the simple
and compound structures of the indicative mood.
Objective: The students will express themselves orally
and through writing using the appropriate vocabulary
and complex sentence structure in the indicative,
subjunctive, and imperative moods, adverb clauses,
and more sophisticated idioms. Evaluation criteria:
two compositions, two auditory tests, two writing
tests covering grammar, two oral tests, assignments/
homework, class participation. Level: Intermediate.
Class limit: 10

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

HS 3023 International Wildlife Policy and
Protected Areas
CLINE, KEN
“Save the whales.” “Save the tiger.” “Save the
rainforest.” Increasingly, wildlife and their habitats are
the subject of international debate with many seeing
wildlife as part of the common heritage of humankind.
Wildlife does not recognize the political boundaries of
national states and as a result purely national efforts
to protect wildlife often fail when wildlife migrates
beyond the jurisdiction of protection. This course
focuses on two principle aspects of international
wildlife conservation: the framework of treaties and
other international mechanisms set up to protect
species; and the system of protected areas established
around the world to protect habitat. We begin with an
examination of several seminal wildlife treaties such
as the International Convention for the Regulation
of Whaling, CITES, migratory bird treaties, and
protocols to the Antarctica Treaty. Using case studies
on some of the more notable wildlife campaigns,
such as those involving whales and elephants, we
seek to understand the tensions between national
sovereignty and international conservation efforts.
The Convention on Biological Diversity and its broad
prescriptions for wildlife protection provide a central
focus for our examination of future efforts. Following
on one of the key provisions in the Convention on
Biological Diversity, the second half of the course
focuses on international and national efforts to create
parks and other protected areas. In particular we
evaluate efforts to create protected areas that serve
the interests of wildlife and resident peoples. Students
gain familiarity with UNESCO’s Biosphere Reserve
model and the IUCN’s protected area classifications.
We also examine in some depth the role that NGO’s
play in international conservation efforts. The
relationship between conservation and sustainable
development is a fundamental question throughout
the course.
Level: Intermediate. Recommended courses: Use
and Abuse of Public Lands, Global Politics and
Sustainability, Global Environmental Politics. Meets
the following degree requirements: HS

HS 3027 Microeconomics for Business and
Policy
TAYLOR, DAVIS
What is the best way to insure that communities
can provide dependable, well-paying jobs to their
citizens? Why does Coca Cola spend millions of dollars
to advertise a product with which most people are
already very familiar? What can the game of blackjack
tell us about how industries are structured? How
can we get coal-burning power utilities to reduce
their carbon emissions while they save millions of
dollars in the process? How can we provide much
better health care to all Americans, at much less

cost, while making it easier for small businesses to
grow? All of these questions, and many more like
them, are answered by microeconomic theory. This
intermediate-level course exposes students to basic
microeconomic theories, models, and concepts
that shed insight on the economic behavior of
businesses, individuals, governments and politicians,
and international organizations. We will emphasize
approaches that have numerous overlapping
applications to both business and policy evaluation:
markets, pricing, firm structure and decision-making,
strategic behavior (using game theory), consumer
behavior, externalities (such as greenhouse gas
emissions), and the provision of public goods (such as
military, education, and environmental conservation).
We will pay special attention to the economics of
asymmetrical information (adverse selection, moral
hazard, and principal-agent situations) that have
a wide range of applications, including issues such
as the ineffectiveness of the American health care
system, the structuring of business finance, and the
hiring and paying of employees. This will be a noncalculus course, but will give students exposure to
technical economic modeling, with heavy emphasis on
graphical modeling of complex social phenomena. We
will use a lab period to conduct extensive experiments
and games that illustrate or test economic concepts
and hypotheses.
Level: Intermediate. Prerequisite: Signature of
instructor or one course in economics or business.
Class limit: 15. Lab fee: None. Meets the following
degree requirements: HS, QR

HS 3029 Shakespeare: Character, Conflict,
and Cinematography
TANEJA, PALAK
This course will focus on Shakespeare’s tragedies as
a direct link between the birth of tragedy in ancient
Greece and the violence of contemporary cinema. The
class begins with a week of Shakespeare’s sonnets as
an entry into the coevolution of language, metaphor
and human emotion. We’ll then compare Hamlet
and Sophocles’ Oedipus Rex in the light of Freudian
theory to shed light on universal issues of incest and
domestic violence, and continue with a play every
week in two extended evening sessions, 4-9 p.m. on
Mondays and Thursdays, with pizza intermission.
The Monday sessions will be a complete dramatic
reading of the play involving the whole class, stopping
to discuss salient points, with the aim of complete
understanding of language, structure and meaning.
The Thursday sessions will be a single or double
feature of contemporary and classic film adaptations,
followed by discussion of the relation between play
and film. Sample pairings would be “Romeo and
Juliet” with Bernstein’s West Side Story; Macbeth with
Geoffrey Wright’s Macbeth and Kurosawa’s Throne
of Blood; King Lear with Moorhouse’s A Thousand
Acres. Two written assignments will involve a choice of

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

103

structural analysis of a play, re-casting Shakespearean
scenes or motifs into original short fiction, or
selecting and following a Shakespeare play through
all its cinematic variations. Texts will be individual
editions of the plays, along with Michael Greer’s
“Screening Shakespeare” for individual background.
Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: prior writing or
literature course recommended. Class limit: 16. Lab
fee: $10. Meets the following degree requirements: HS

HS 3031 Our Public Lands: Past, Present,
and Future
CLINE, KEN
By definition, public lands belong to all of us, yet
public lands in this country have a history of use
(and abuse) by special interests and a shocking
absence of any coherent management strategy for
long-term sustainability. This course is taught in
seminar format in which students read and discuss
several environmental policy and history texts that
concern the history and future of our federal lands.
We also use primary historic documents and texts
to understand the origins of public ownership and
management. We examine the legal, philosophical,
ecological, and political problems that have faced our
national parks, wildlife refuges, national forests, and
other public lands. An effort is made to sort out the
tangle of laws and conflicting policies that govern
these public resources. Special attention is given to
the historic roots of current policy debates. Evaluation
is based upon response papers, a class presentation,
participation in class discussions, and a group project
looking closely at the historical context and policy
implications of a management issue facing a nearby
public land unit.

primary goal is to give students an intensive, ten-week
crash course into key events, concepts, figures, etc.
that defined the early decades of Cold War diplomacy.
At the same time there is also time allocated for
students to explore their own independent research
interests. Given the far-reaching force of Cold War
politics into everyday life, individuals with widely
varying academic interests will find the course
informative and productive. Evaluation will be based
on a mix of class participation, individual research
assignments, and exams. All students, regardless of
their backgrounds, previous coursework, or interests
are welcome.
Level: Intermediate. Class limit: 30. Lab fee: None.
Meets the following degree requirements: HY, HS

HS 3035 Sustainable Strategies
FRIEDLANDER, JAY

HS 3032 The Cold War: Early Years

Business has tremendous societal ramifications.
Inventions and industries from the automobile to
the internet impact everything from air quality to
economic and political freedom. Entrepreneurs,
who are often at the forefront of business, and thus
societal innovation, are changing the way business is
conducted by creating businesses that are beneficial
to the bottom line, society and the environment.
Through cases, projects, and present-day examples,
the course will challenge students to understand the
impact of business on society and the challenges and
pitfalls of creating a socially responsible venture. In
addition, it will offer new frameworks for creating
entrepreneurial ventures that capitalize on social
responsibility to gain competitive advantage and
increase valuation while benefiting society and the
environment. The final deliverable for the course is
an in-class presentation in which student teams will
either: (1) recommend ways to improve the social
and environmental impacts of a company, while
increasing competitive advantage and bottom line; or
(2) benchmark two industry competitors, a socially
responsible company versus a traditional company.

MCKOWN, JAMIE

Level: Intermediate. Class limit: 15

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisite: Introductory history
or policy class recommended. Class limit: 20. Lab fee
$15. Meets the following degree requirements: HS, HY

This course provides a broad historical overview of
the early years of the Cold War period that shaped
global politics generally and American foreign policy
specifically. Beginning in the 1940s and leading up to
Richard Nixon’s election in 1968 we will examine the
diplomatic relationship between the United States
and the Soviet Union and how this relationship has
impacted state actors, economic policies, cultural
production, and conceptions of identity. While
there will be a heavy focus on traditional state-level
diplomatic history, students will also explore a broad
array of methodological approaches. Class sessions
will include a mix of traditional lecture formats, class
discussion, and outside presentations. An evening lab
is scheduled in order to screen a variety of cultural
artifacts from the various periods we will cover. The
104

HS 3036 Oceans and Fishes: Readings in
Environmental History
LITTLE-SIEBOLD, TODD
This course will explore the rapidly expanding field
of marine environmental history and historical
studies that focus on fish and fisheries. Recent
methodological and conceptual work as well as
growing interest in the history of these topics driven
by conservation and policy issues has made this an
important and innovative field. Using the work of a
variety of scholars from different fields the class will
explore how historical accounts can be constructed
with an emphasis on the types of available sources,
the use of evidence, and how each author builds their
COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

argument. We will explicitly compare the methods, use
of evidence and other aspects of different disciplinary
approaches to the topic to highlight the strengths
and limitations of each approach. This dimension of
the class is particularly interesting because of the
dynamic and interdisciplinary nature of scholarship
right now that brings a wide range of research into
dialogue. Students will learn about the history of
oceans and fishes by looking at how historians and
other scholars frame their works and make their
arguments. Students will be evaluated on their
preparation for discussion, mastery of the material,
short written assignments, and a final project made up
of a presentation and essay. This course is appropriate
for students with interest in history, community-based
research, marine studies, and environmental policy.
Students who are just curious and interested in lots of
things are also most welcome.
Level: Intermediate. Class limit: 15. Lab Fee $75.00.
Meets the following degree requirements: HS, HY

HS 3038 The Cold War: The Later Years
MCKOWN, JAMIE
This course provides a broad historical overview of
the early years of the Cold War period that shaped
global politics generally and American foreign policy
specifically. Beginning with the election of Richard
Nixon in 1968 and following up to today, we will focus
on the diplomatic relationship between the United
States and the Soviet Union/Russia and how this
relationship has impacted state actors, economic
policies, cultural production, and conceptions
of identity. While there will be a heavy focus on
traditional state-level diplomatic history, students
will also explore a broad array of methodological
approaches. Class sessions will include a mix of
traditional lecture formats, class discussion, and
outside presentations. An evening lab is scheduled
in order to screen a variety of cultural artifacts from
the various periods we will cover. The primary goal is
to give students an intensive, tdn-week crash course
into key events, concepts, figures, etc. that defined
the later decades of Cold War diplomacy. At the
same time there is also time allocated for students
to explore their own independent research interests.
Given the far-reaching force of Cold War politics into
everyday life, individuals with widely varying academic
interests will find the course informative and
productive. Evaluation will be based on a mix of class
participation, individual research assignments, and
exams. While this class is designed to compliment the
topics covered in The Cold War: Early Years, students
are not required to have had this earlier class. Both
courses are designed as stand alone. All students,
regardless of their backgrounds, previous coursework,
or interests are welcome.
Level: Intermediate. Class limit: 20. Lab fee: None.
Meets the following degree requirements: HS, HY

HS 3039 Communicating Science
ROCK, JENNIFER
This course is designed for science students
developing their research skills working on research
projects for a principal investigator; specifically this
course will improve the students’ writing ability and
introduce them to writing for the scientific community
and the lay public. The course involves not only
learning to write an abstract and literature review
but also understanding the protocols for writing a
scientific paper based on lab or field data. In addition,
students will prepare a power point presentation on
their research to present at a meeting or conference
such as the Maine Biological Science Symposium or
the annual INBRE meeting. In addition to working with
the instructor, students will work on the content of
their writing with the principal investigator. Offered
every other year.
Level: Intermediate. Prerequisite: Signature of
instructor. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: $20. Meets the
following degree requirements: W

HS 3040 History of Agriculture: Apples
LITTLE-SIEBOLD, TODD
This course will explore the history of agriculture
from the vantage point of Downeast Maine with a
focus on apples. The premise of the course is that by
exploring this fascinating crop in detail from the local
vantage point of Downeast Maine students will be able
to grasp the many historical processes at work from
the introduction of the fruit in the late 16th and early
17th centuries to the age of agricultural improvement
in the 18th on to the rise and fall of commercial
orcharding as a major component of Maine’s farm
economy in the early 20th century. Using sources
ranging from secondary sources, historical atlases,
aerial surveys, and diaries, we will explore how the
culture of apple agriculture in Maine develops over
time as part of an interconnected Atlantic world where
crops flow back and forth between Britain and the
colonies/US over hundreds of years. Course activities
will include fruit exploration and fieldtrips to track
down and identify antique varieties, as well as visits
to the local farms where a new generation of apple
culture is taking shape. The course will also engage
students with the process of cider making, both sweet
and hard, as well as exercises in the preparation,
storage, and processing of apples. Students will be
evaluated on their participation in discussion, how
they collaborate with others in class projects, and a
final individual or collaborative project. This course is
designed for students interested in history, farming
and food systems, community-based research, and
policy/planning issues. It is also very appropriate for
students who like apples and just want to know (a lot)
more.
Level: Intermediate. Limit: 18. Lab Fee: $125.00. Meets
the following degree requirements: HS, HY

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

105

HS 3050 Poetry Workshop

HS 3059 Native American Literature

MAHONEY, DANIEL

WALDRON, KAREN

This class is designed to teach the skills and
techniques of writing poems. We will begin by
discussing what makes a poem a poem—specifically,
intensity of language, image, and metaphor. Students
will craft their own poems and submit them for peer
and instructor review, which will focus on these three
aspects and expand from there. In discussion, we will
look at what is giving a poem life, and what is taking
life away from a poem, such as breakdowns in logic or
syntax, the use of derivative material, or the failure to
develop. At all times discussion will be grounded and
informed by successful poems in the tradition, both
contemporary and from the canon. Assigned readings
from the two texts above will inform discussion of
important poetic devices, such as use of image,
metaphor, voice, sentence, and meter.

This course is a challenging introduction to several
centuries of Native American literature, the relevance
of historical and cultural facts to its literary forms,
and the challenges of bridging oral and written
traditions. Authors include such writers as Silko,
Erdrich, Harjo, Vizenor, and McNickle as well as earlier
speeches and short stories. We also consider nonNative readings and appropriation of Native American
styles, material, and world views.
Level: Intermediate. Class limit: 15. Lab fee: None.
Meets the following degree requirements: HS

HS 3061 Postcolonial Islands
VAN VLIET, NETTA

Assignments will include: writing new poems; revising
these poems (addressing at least some of the issues
identified by me and by the class); providing detailed
comments on poems by other class members;
reading and discussing assigned poems; and writing
several brief written responses to readings of the
student’s choice from the two texts or other books of
contemporary poetry.
Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: Some experience
writing poetry. Class limit: 12. Lab Fee: None

HS 3055 The Mayas of Yesterday and Today
PEÑA, KARLA
This is a course in the history and culture of the
Yucatec Maya offered as part of the College’s Yucatán
program in Mexico. It will cover key features of the
Pre-Hispanic, Colonial, and Modern eras. Readings
will include classic texts by and about them as
well as contemporary studies in archaeology and
anthropology. Themes will include social structure,
religion, politics, agricultural practices, language,
and family life. Homework will include various short
writing assignments and oral project reports. Field
trips in and around Merida will be included both to
visit archaeological sites of special interest and also
to visit contemporary communities of Maya. Each
student will do a major final project which will include
research in texts and fieldwork which culminate in an
extended study on site in a Maya village. This course
will be taught entirely in Spanish.
Level: Intermediate. Prerequisite: Signature of
Yucatán program director and co-enrollment in
Spanish Language and Immersion Practica. Lab fee:
TBA. Class limit: 12

106

This course focuses on islands—geopolitically
and conceptually—to consider the significance of
postcolonial difference for contemporary political
questions about representation, violence, exile and
diaspora, climate change, poverty, racialization, and
sexuality. Islands have long been imagined as sites
of fantastic possibility and power, as places of refuge
and respite as well as places of horror and dread.
They are places imagined as home to cannibals and
monsters, but also as idyllic vacations spots and safe
havens for shipwrecked sailors. Etymologically, the
word island carries with it the meaning of both land
and water, and islands are defined as fragments of a
whole, and simultaneously as whole unto themselves,
raising questions about binaries and boundaries
between self and other and about the conceptual
topographies of territory, land and water, thresholds
between here and there. Islands have been sites ripe
for colonial ventures, understood as isolated, insular,
and susceptible to translation and appropriation but
also as resistant, bounded, singular, and fertile sites of
diversity. Islands have also been significant in religious
understandings of them as sites for communion with
God or as final places of burial. This course will examine
islands in these terms as they have been articulated
in the literary imagination, in postcolonial studies
and ethnography, and in political theory. Drawing
on examples such as Defoe’s Robinson Crusoe, J.M.
Coetzee’s Foe, The Odyssey, Plato’s Atlantis, Jonathan
Swift’s Gulliver’s Travels, Shakespeare’s The Tempest,
Octave Mannoni’s Prospero and Caliban, Aime Cesaire’s
A Tempest, as well as on ethnography in island studies
(including classic ethnography such as Malinowski’s
Trobriand Islands, and recent scholarship such as The
Island Studies Journal and A World of Islands), we will
consider questions about political representation,
language and translation, religious, ethnic and sexual
difference, the definition of the human, mobility and
sovereignty, resistance, and domination. Students
will be evaluated based on attendance, in-class
participation, reading responses, one short analytical
essay, and a final exploratory research project that

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

examines Mount Desert Island in the context of course
materials.
Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: None. Class
limit: 10. Lab fee: $10. Meets the following degree
requirements: HS

HS 3062 Solutions
FRIEDLANDER, JAY
We live in a world of problems—global warming,
inequality, discrimination, child labor, slavery, waste,
species extinction, domestic violence, and a myriad
of other issues occupying the headlines can feel
overwhelming at times. Unfortunately, we rarely here
about solutions, let alone have the opportunity to
create our own solutions for the issues that concern
us and inspire us to action.
Changing the world takes more than a critical eye
for what is wrong, proselytizing a good idea and
hope. There are many factors which contribute to
creating social change and in this course we explore
what it takes to be a successful change maker in our
communities, and thus in the world. Reversing the lens
we use to approach the problems of the world is part
of what a human ecologist needs to do to understand
our challenges:
“Social entrepreneurs are uniquely suited to make
headway on problems that have resisted considerable
money and intelligence. Where governments and
traditional organizations look at problems from the
outside, social entrepreneurs come to understand
them intimately, from within” —David Bornstein, How
To Change The World
In this experiential, project-based course students
will select a specific problem they would like to
solve. Students will perform thorough research
into a problem of their choosing, understanding it
from within by identifying root causes and other
exacerbating factors as well as investigating positive
deviance and what people around the world are doing
to solve this issue. Through these projects and other
readings, students will examine a myriad of problems
around the world and look at different strategies
people are using to tackle them and create positive
social change. The final project for the course will
be a concrete proposal for solving the problem they
selected. Students will be evaluated based on their
performance, participation, and the quality of the
projects they produce over the course of the term.
Level: Intermediate. Class limit: 15. Lab fee: $50. Meets
the following degree requirements: HS

HS 3068 Linguistics, Language, and
Culture: Human Ecological Approach
COX, GRAY
This course explores the basic questions concerning
the origins, nature, history, functions, and

philosophical significances of human languages.
Comparisons to other species and to machine
languages will also be examined. Readings will
include classics texts by Chomsky and others as
well selected materials from diverse disciplines such
as linguistic anthropology, psychology, ethology,
aesthetics, history of languages, and philosophy.
Class sessions will include a mix of discussion, lecture,
and visiting speakers. Each student will undertake a
term-long project examining some topic of interest
and examine it from the point of view of the different
disciplines and theories covered in the course. Project
topics might include the development of identity,
the articulation of gender, forms of representation,
the expression of emotion, concepts of rationality,
relations between meaning and truth, and
communication in an age of artificial intelligences. The
goals of the course are: 1) to familiarize students with
the range of phenomena associated with language
and the principal questions they raise and the theories
used to interpret them, and 2) to develop skills in
researching interdisciplinary questions. Assignments
will include two problem sets, a series of weekly
homework exercises, and the term project which must
be presented both orally and in a major paper due at
the end of the term. Evaluation will be based on the
extent to which in-class participation and work on
the assignments demonstrates substantive progress
on the two goals of the course. There are no specific
prerequisites, but students will be expected to be able
to contribute insights, information, and questions
from previous work in relevant disciplines and/or
studies of languages, undertake challenging readings,
and pursue a major independent project.
Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: None. Class
limit: 20. Lab fee: $20. Meets the following degree
requirements: HS

HS 3069 Genocide, Resistance, Response,
and Reconciliation
WESSLER, STEPHEN L
Students will explore: the differences and similarities
between genocides and ethnic cleansings; why people
join resistance groups; why other countries intervene
or fail to intervene to stop genocide; and whether post
genocide reconciliation is effective. The course will
focus on several genocides or ethnic cleansings from
different parts of the globe, for example toward Native
Americans in the US, Chinese in Nanking, Jews, Roma,
and others during the Holocaust, Muslims in Bosnia &
Herzegovina, and Tutsi people (and a smaller number
of Hutus) in Rwanda. Students will be evaluated
based on short written responses to readings, in class
discussion, two papers, and a final project. The final
project will explore the topics in the course through
fiction, poetry, art, film, advocacy, interviews, or other
forms of expression. The course readings will be a
mix of scholarly writing about genocide, first person
accounts, and perhaps some fiction and poetry. We

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

107

will also may watch and discuss videos. Class sessions
will involve discussions with all of us together and
also in small group discussions between students.
The focus on both resistance and reconciliation are
important in their own right but also will provide the
students and me with the opportunity to temper the
highly disturbing material on genocide by focusing on
the remarkable courage of individuals both during and
after genocide has run its course.
Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: None. Class limit:
15. Lab fee: $20

HS 3070 Native American Law
CLINE, KEN
From first contact through the confrontation
surrounding the Standing Rock Sioux Tribe and the
Dakota Access Pipeline, Native American law has
tried to reconcile two incommensurate legal systems
and widely varying government policies. This course
examines the evolution of federal Native American or
“Indian” Law from colonization onward as impacted by
treaties, executive orders, congressional enactments,
and major US Supreme Court cases interpreting the
US Constitution and statutes as they involve Native
American legal issues. This is not a class about tribal
law or the indigenous legal systems that exist among
the various tribes in the US; rather, it examines the
legal system imposed on tribes from the outside—a
system that has evolved over time and creates the
legal framework which tribes operate under today.
Students will gain an understanding of law as a policy
tool and framework, and acquire the necessary skills
to work on policy issues affecting Native peoples.
We will focus on primary legal material as well as
secondary interpretations of that material. There
will be some comparative law analysis from other
countries and an examination of how the United
Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples relates to US practices. Students will
complete several analytical problem sets that require
an application of course concepts to fact scenarios
as well as a major paper on a legal topic of their
choosing. A class visit to a Maine reservation will allow
conversation with tribal leaders involved with current
environmental and Native American issues in Maine.
Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: None beyond
proficiency in college-level reading, writing, critical
thinking, and research skills; however, Indigenous
America is strongly recommended. Class limit: 20. Lab
fee: $35. Meets the following degree requirements: HS

HS 3073 Bees and Society
COLLUM, KOURTNEY
In the last decade the plight of wild and domesticated
bees has pervaded the media and public discourse,
yet bees remain largely misunderstood in our
society. This course examines the interconnected

108

relationship between humans and bees and asks
what bees can teach us about ourselves and our
food systems. Through readings, fieldtrips, and
guest lectures, students will examine the social,
economic, and political dimensions of human-bee
interactions, investigating topics such as: historical
and contemporary beekeeping practices; the
political economy of honey; the role of pollination
in agriculture and agroecosystems; domestication
and human-animal relationships; biodiversity loss
in agricultural systems; pollinator conservation
and policy; and cooperation and decision making in
human and bee societies. A truly human-ecological
course, Bees & Society integrates the humanities,
natural sciences, and social sciences to examine
the applied problem of protecting pollinators in a
time of abrupt environmental change. Students
will be evaluated based on: (1) participation in class
discussions, fieldwork, and field trips; (2) a series of
short reflection papers; and (3) a final class project.
For their final project, students will develop two native
bee conservation workshops—one for elementary
school students and one for farmers and gardeners—
and host the workshops at COA’s farms.
Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: None. Class
limit: 14. Lab fee: $60. Meets the following degree
requirements: HS

HS 3074 Mapping the Ocean’s Stories
LITTLE-SIEBOLD, TODD
This course will examine how members of Maine’s
remote coastal and islands communities live in
relationship to the ocean. Their connection to the
nearby and distant waters is defined by everyday uses
such as fishing, lobstering, and wrinkle harvesting as
well as deeper historical relationships rooted in many
generations of people doing everything from sailing
schooners around the world to harvesting shellfish
in the same cove over centuries. This class will teach
students how to use multidisciplinary research
methodologies to document, map, and analyze both
contemporary and historical uses of the ocean.
Using coastal and island communities as sites for
collaborative, community-based research the class will
contribute to wider discussions about a process known
as ocean planning that seeks to create processes to
plan how communities, stakeholders, industry, and
the government build a long term vision of how the
spaces of the Gulf of Maine might be used. Students
will work in teams to produce a geo-referenced story
about a particular place in the ocean off the coast of
Maine that has meaning and an emotional connection
to a community told in an interesting and compelling
way. This information will help give island communities
a stronger voice in ocean policy and in decision
making processes for siting large scale projects in
the nearby ocean environment. The class will draw
on methodologies developed around North America
to document the everyday uses and interactions

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

people have with the local environment using oral
historical and biographical mapping to provide a
sort of snapshot of current uses as well as soliciting
histories of how those patterns have changed over
time. The class will include a substantial fieldwork
and field trip component that will require additional
times outside of the class schedule. Students will be
evaluated on class participation, active engagement
in field research settings, short assignments, and a
final project. The class is appropriate for students
with a range of backgrounds, however, experience
with historical or community-based research or GIS
mapping would be helpful.
Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: Preference will
be given to students who have previous communitybased research experience or other academic
background directly relevant to the course. Class
limit: 15. Lab fee: $150. Meets the following degree
requirements: HS

HS 3076 US Farm and Food Policy
COLLUM, KOURTNEY
This course offers a broad introduction to food and
farm policy in the United States. Food and farm policy
encompasses laws, regulations, norms, decisions,
and actions by governments and other institutions
that influence food production, distribution, access,
consumption, and recovery. This course focuses on
the policy process and two major policy tools: the US
Farm Bill and US Dietary Guidelines for Americans.
The course begins with an overview of the evolution
of food and farming technology in the United States.
Students are then introduced to the concepts,
institutions, and stakeholders that influence farm and
food policy, and examine examples of some of the
most salient contemporary issues. Topics covered
include: food production and the environment;
farm-based biodiversity conservation; international
food and agricultural trade; food processing,
manufacturing, and retail industries; food safety;
dietary and nutrition guidelines; food labeling and
advertising; food and biotechnology; food waste
and recovery; food advocacy and activism; and food
insecurity and the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance
Program (SNAP). Through case studies and exercises
students examine the policymaking process at the
local, state, and federal level and learn to evaluate
various policy options. Finally, the course compares
and contrasts international perspectives on farm and
food policies and programs. Students are evaluated
based on participation in class discussions, a series of
op-ed essays, in-class briefs and debates, and a policy
recommendation report on the upcoming US Farm Bill.
Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: Must have taken
at least one course in food systems, economics, or
global politics. Class limit: 16. Lab fee: None. Meets the
following degree requirements: HS

HS 3079 College Seminar: The
Anthropology of Food
COLLUM, KOURTNEY
This course uses food as a lens to explore human
origins, cultural diversity, social structure, and
human/environment interactions. Through academic
articles and films, the course exposes students to
the different ways anthropologists think about food
and the frameworks they use to answer questions
concerning the human experience. The course also
engages other disciplinary perspectives—including
history, economics, and political ecology—to make
larger connections between food and society.
Designed as a survey course, this course introduces
students not only to writing as process—prewriting,
writing, and rewriting—but also to the broad and
dynamic subfield of food anthropology. The course
is organized around four themes. The first—human
origins, diets, and biocultural evolution—explores the
uniqueness of cooking to the human species, and
how the coevolution of human diets and culture has
shaped different groups’ dietary needs, practices,
and restrictions. The second—globalization and
international trade—looks at the flow of foods and
food practices around the world, from sugar to sushi.
The third—hegemony and difference—considers how
race, gender, and class are constructed and expressed
through food. The final theme—consumption and
embodiment—considers the relationship between
eating and the body; readings in this section focus
on body image, eating practices, and critical studies
of the rhetoric around hunger and obesity. Students
are evaluated based on class participation, a series
of reflection papers, a dietary analysis, a recipe
project involving a prepared meal, an audio-visual
presentation, and a critical analysis paper. This course
meets the first-year writing requirement.
Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: None. Class
limit: 12. Lab fee: $20. Meets the following degree
requirements: HS, W

HS 3083 Feminist Theory in a
Transnational Frame II
VAN VLIET, NETTA
This course covers some of the central texts and
genealogies of feminist thought, with a focus on
transnational feminist theory. We will address periods
of feminist thought that have been significant in
shaping the concerns of transnational feminisms,
including 1970s US feminism, French feminism,
postcolonial theory, and Marxist thought. Through
seminar discussion about a variety of texts and
films, we will consider how differences across
national borders have informed discussions about
transnational feminist solidarity. We will examine how
feminist theory can help us think about the following:
kinship; reproduction; the law and justice; human

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

109

HS 3086 Sustenance

rights discourse, political economy, racialization
and other forms of difference; existence and the
subject; the relation between individual and group;
the relation between terms such as “gender” and
“sex;” and the varied currencies the terms “queer”
and “feminist” have carried in different national
and transnational contexts. This course builds on
Feminist Theory in a Transnational Frame, and while
prior coursework in feminist and sexuality studies
is beneficial, it is not necessary. Ideally, students in
the course will have varied degrees of familiarity
with the central questions of the course. This should
allow for substantive discussion and opportunities to
both formulate and respond to questions posed by
class material. This class builds on work done in other
courses that address questions of feminist thought,
but also is intended to include students with a range
of backgrounds. Students will be evaluated based
on class participation, weekly reading responses, a
midterm and a final essay.

FRIEDLANDER, JAY

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: Prior coursework
in the fields of feminist thought, sexuality and gender
studies is useful, but not necessary; permission of
instructor required. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: $10. Meets
the following degree requirements: HS

Sustenance is defined as the maintenance or support
of someone or something. It can also be defined as
food and drink as a source of strength or nourishment.
This course embraces both definitions as it delves
into case studies of food enterprises across Maine’s
agrifood value chain. Two central questions frame
the course: 1) What does it take to sustain Maine’s
food system? 2) How do food systems entrepreneurs
pursuing their passion sustain themselves? Through
academic articles, guest lectures, case studies,
and field experiences, students will learn about the
physical, political, economic, and social infrastructure
that supports Maine’s food system. In addition,
they’ll learn about the benefits and challenges faced
by those dedicating their lives to food systems
ventures. Highlighting the essential links that exist
between farm and table, professional and personal,
and idea and implementation, students will examine
enterprises ranging from slaughterhouses and
breweries to seaweed drying facilities and wholesale
food distributors. Students will be evaluated based on
class participation, a series of reflection papers, and a
final project.

HS 3085 College Seminar: Nutritional
Anthropology

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: None. Class
limit: 12. Lab fee: $40. Meets the following degree
requirements: HS

COLLUM, KOURTNEY
Eating is both a biological need and an intensely social
activity. This course examines the evolution, diversity,
social significance, and health consequences of the
human diet across time and space. Designed as a
college seminar, this course introduces students to
writing as process—prewriting, writing, and rewriting—
and the broad and dynamic subfield of nutritional
anthropology. Through academic articles, films,
and guest lectures, the course weaves together the
biological and cultural threads of anthropology to
consider human nutrition in all its complexity. The
course is designed to complement The Anthropology
of Food by focusing in on biocultural approaches
to the study of human diets. The course covers
foundations and theories of nutritional anthropology,
the evolution and adaptation of human diets, dietary
transitions and globalization, and under- and overnutrition. Students are evaluated based on class
participation, a series of synthesis papers, a critical
analysis paper, and a research project including a
paper and an audio-visual presentation.
Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: None. Class
limit: 12. Lab fee: $10. Meets the following degree
requirements: HS, W

110

HS 3087 Seminar in Human Ecology
BORDEN, RICHARD
This seminar traces the historical development of
human ecology. We begin by reviewing the seminal
works in human ecology, the contributions from
biology, and the development of human ecology as
a multidisciplinary concept. Along these lines we
compare the various brands of human ecology that
have developed through sociology (the Chicago
school), anthropology and cultural ecology, ecological
psychology, and economics, as well as humanecological themes in the humanities, architecture,
design, and planning. This background is then used to
compare the COA brand of human ecology with other
programs in this country and elsewhere around the
world. Our final purpose is to look at new ideas coming
from philosophy, the humanities, biological ecology,
and other areas for future possibilities for human
ecology. Evaluations are based on presentations and
papers. Offered every other year.
Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: None. Class
limit: 15. Lab fee: $25. Meets the following degree
requirements: HS

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

HS 3098 On Questions of Rights,
Responsibility, and Reparations

short midterm essay (three pages) and one short final
paper (five pages).

VAN VLIET, NETTA

Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: Open to all
college levels, but students should have some prior
coursework or background in engaging with some
of the conceptual questions that inform this course,
and be prepared for a heavy reading load. Permission
required. Class limit: 15. Lab fee: None. Meets the
following degree requirements: HS

This class examines concepts of rights, responsibility,
and reparations in terms of questions about injustice.
Over the course of the trimester, we will consider
some of the ways these terms have been used in 20th
and 21st century attempts to address the aftermath
of intertwined histories of colonialism, slavery
and capitalism. We will focus on examples that are
different in terms of scale (e.g. institutions such as
nation-states and schools, corporations, as well as
individuals and groups, and the relations between
them), and which differ in terms of political, cultural,
national, and historical context. The examples will
be situated in relation to each other, not through
comparison in terms of similarities and differences,
but through historical and conceptual relation. We will
examine examples from contexts that may include:
South Africa’s Truth and Reconciliation Commission;
Guatemala’s Commission for Historical Clarification;
German Holocaust reparations and Israeli state
formation; debates about and proposals for slavery
reparations in the United States; College of the
Atlantic’s efforts to reckon with its own histories; the
controversy over the University of North Carolina’s
“Silent Sam” confederate statue; and related
discussions about how to “repair” and respond to
the aftermaths of past wrongs, including debates
over statues, the names of streets and buildings,
the content and framing of school curriculums,
and the relation between law and justice. This is
an interdisciplinary course that draws from work
in the arts and humanities, including in the fields
and disciplines of postcolonial studies, literature,
philosophy, history, feminist studies, and cultural
anthropology.
Material will likely include texts by Hannah Arendt,
Srinivas Aravamudan, Maoz Azaryahu, W.E.B. Du
Bois, Roy L. Brooks, Tina Chanter, Ta-Nehisi Coates,
J.M. Coeztee, Jacques Derrida, Euripides, Shoshana
Felman, Sigmund Freud, Stuart Hall, Ranjana Khanna,
Karl Marx, Chandra Mohanty, Jacques Rancière,
Edward Said, Joan Scott, Hortense Spillers, and
Gayatri Spivak. Readings may include selections from
truth commission reports and related documents,
media articles, as well as fiction works including the
play The Trojan Women, the novel Disgrace, and the
films Bridge Over the Wadi and Arna’s Children. As we
move through this material, we will consider questions
about inheritance, capital, violence, choice, response,
how an “individual” is understood in relation to group
categories and contexts, and relations between
politics and aesthetics. In doing so, we will address
questions about and understandings of freedom,
reconciliation, economic justice, difference, and
responsibility.
Students will be evaluated based on class participation
in seminar discussions, weekly reading responses, one

HS 3099 A History of God: Mysticism,
Metaphysics, Politics, and Nature
COX, GRAY
Religious experiences and concepts have been
central in history. They have informed ideas of self,
community and nature as well as practices of science,
technology and politics. This course provides an
intellectual history of the concepts of god or gods
and related notions and practices. It will focus on
them as they have developed in the West but will
also look, briefly, for comparative purposes at India
and China. It will use secondary materials like Karen
Armstrong’s A History of God and Peter Adamson’s
A History of Philosophy Without Any Gaps to follow
threads of the story from early polytheism up through
the present day. It will also focus on a series of short
selected primary sources including sacred texts as
well as writings by philosophers, theologians, political
thinkers, and mystics. Class format will be a mixture
of lecture and discussion. Students will be evaluated
on their participation in discussions and their ability
to convey their understanding of material in short
homework assignments, two problem sets, and two
papers analyzing the historical connections between
one or more texts and their contexts.
Level: Intermediate. Pre-requisites: None. Class
limit: 16. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree
requirements: HS, HY

HS 3100 Within Living Memory: Audio
Production and Podcasting
KOCH, GALEN
This course will explore the process of narrative
storytelling with sound. We will study a broad range of
audio formats, from podcasts to audio installations to
interactive soundwalks. Students will learn each step
of creating an audio story, from recording techniques
and initial collection in the field or in archival
collections through the writing to the final production
of a podcast or audio piece. Students will learn the
technical skills of digitizing audio and conducting
interviews, scripting and writing stories based on that
audio, editing audio, and creating sound-rich audio
productions in digital editing software.
This class will focus primarily on digital material
already collected in the field or found in local
collections. These stories are from Downeast

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

111

communities in Hancock and Washington counties
and will build on ongoing collaborative work. Students
will work in small groups and individually on each
stage of production based on their interests as
well as on ongoing projects. Opportunities exist to
explore various forms of audio storytelling in a final
project. This course is for students with interests
in documentary work, storytelling, oral history,
and community-based research broadly construed.
Students will be evaluated on individual audio
assignments (transcription, scripting, digitizing, and
production work) as well as their contribution to group
projects.
Level: Intermediate: Prerequisites: Permission of
instructor; preference will be given to students who
have academic background in community-based work
or documentary work or who are in their 3rd or 4th
year. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: None

HS 3102 The Human Ecology of Wilderness
CLINE, KEN
Wilderness has been the clarion call for generations of
environmentalists. Henry David Thoreau once said, “In
wildness is the preservation of the world.” That single
sentence and the controversy surrounding that idea
provides the central focus of our explorations over the
term. This course examines the question of wilderness
from multiple perspectives in the hopes of providing
an understanding of the concept and real spaces that
constitute wilderness. Starting with a week-long canoe
trip down Maine’s Allagash Wilderness Waterway, we
look at historical and contemporary accounts of the
value of wilderness, biological, and cultural arguments
for wilderness, and the legal and policy difficulties
of protecting wilderness. Considerable time is spent
evaluating current criticisms of the wilderness idea
and practice. Students are involved in a term-long
project involving potential wilderness protection in
Maine. This involves some weekend travel and work
in the Maine woods. Classwork emphasizes hands-on
projects as well as theoretical discussions.
Level: Intermediate. Prerequisite: Introduction to the
Legal Process and permission of instructor. Class
limit: 14. Lab fee: $200. Meets the following degree
requirements: HS

HS 3103 Terrestrial Politics
STABINSKY, DOREEN
This course explores politics of the terrestrial, of
the earth and its defenders, through lenses of both
theory and practice. Through their writings and,
where possible, in direct conversation, we interact
with activists and movements involved in struggles
to protect Earth, land, livelihoods, and community,
and those actively working to build alternatives to
ways of being in the world that they are struggling
against. We also read theoretical reflections on

112

these struggles, drawing from scholars in the fields
of political ecology, political ontology, and political
economy, among others. Locally rooted activities take
place within global economic and political contexts—
markets, international treaties, and other spaces
and places where local and global come into contact,
where ontologies collide, and where different forms
of power are produced and interact across distances.
Course materials and discussion will explore these
global contexts, concrete ways and means by which
economic and political power is contested in these
spaces, and ongoing experiments with and strivings
toward a different world, one where many worlds may
fit. Topics explored include resistance against mining
and other extractive industries, pipeline fights, land
grabbing for agro-industrial expansion, carbon and
biodiversity offset markets, and geoengineering.
Evaluation in the class will be based on preparation
for and participation in class discussions, regular
reflective essays on readings, and a final extended
essay, presentation, or podcast on some aspect of
terrestrial politics.
Level: Intermediate.Prerequisites: None. Class
limit: 18. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree
requirements: HS

HS 3104 Are you down with the cause?:
Student Activism in Higher Ed
BLANSETT, RACHEL
Following the founding of the Black Lives Matter
movement in 2013, many colleges have seen an
increase of student protests to address racial injustice
and anti-Blackness at their institutions. Student
protests have also extended outside of race to cover
topics such as gender exclusion and transphobia,
sexual violence and harrassment, student labor and
wage exploitation, lack of institutional resources,
access, representation, and more. Student
activism can be seen used as a response to specific
institutional acts of discrimination and bias while
other movements are being built based around
national and global events (i.e. Black Lives Matter,
#FreePalestine, DACA, etc.). Though we have seen
growth of student unrest on college campuses,
student activism is actually not new and holds a long,
historical legacy in higher education.
This course will provide an overview of how activism
and higher education function together and how
they are dependent on one another to operate.
Additionally, we will examine the ways student
activism has played an integral role in shaping the
foundations and progression of higher education and
academia. We will review the historical context and
importance of student activism on college campuses
and the impact of current events and intersectional
dynamics. We will analyze the influence of student
activism on student learning and retention, the
differences in efficacy between online and offline

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

activism, and will provide practical skill-building and
praxis towards creating change in higher education
and beyond.
Students will be evaluated based on attendance,
in-class participation and discussion, short topical
research assignments, and a final project. This class
will be hosted virtually with two in-person sessions
(dates to be announced). This will be a hybrid course
offered between Sterling College and College of the
Atlantic.
Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 8.
Lab fee: None

HS 3105 Policing in Communities of Color
WESSLER, STEPHEN L
This course focuses on policing in communities
of color. We will examine the long and continuing
history of destructive and violent policing toward
Black people in the United States. We will also situate
that history in the context of other ongoing crises
including the decades long war on drugs and the
disproportionate mass incarceration of people of color
in US prisons. The course will especially focus on the
efforts of organizations such as Black Lives Matter
to reduce the high level of deaths of black people at
the hands of police as well as their advocacy for the
defunding of police. We will also examine strategies
to reduce both implicit bias and explicit bias among
police officers, as well as efforts to reduce the distrust
of police in communities of color by training police
in effective skills for de-escalating tense situations.
We will examine recent efforts by the United States
Department of Justice to improve policing by the use
of restraining orders. As a point of comparison, we will
spend some of our time reviewing recent or ongoing
work conducted in Europe to develop and implement
training programs for police officers with the aim to
reduce unnecessary and unlawful violence toward
Roma people. In addition to the readings, students
can expect presentations from and discussions with
guest speakers who have been recently working to
address the harms of police violence, both in the
US and abroad. Student evaluation will be based
on class participation, a series of short written
responses related to readings, a longer form essay or
short fictional story related to a single reading, the
drafting of an opinion-editorial piece regarding the
effectiveness of “defunding” the police, and a written
response to a case study that is coauthored with a
partner.
Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: None. Class limit:
16. Lab fee: None

HS 3106 Blue Food Systems
SMITH, HILLARY
Just three aquatic species account for most seafood
consumed in the US: shrimp, tuna, and salmon. But

worldwide consumption is more diverse, including
an array of finfish, invertebrates, aquatic plants,
algae, and other animals. These blue foods are fished,
collected, gathered, or grown in the sea or freshwater
and play essential roles in supporting human health,
nutrition, livelihoods, and culture. Recent studies
have shown that the top seven categories of nutrientrich, animal-source foods are all aquatic in origin. So
why do food policy and science still heavily focus on
terrestrially produced foods, overlooking blue foods?
This course will unpack this conundrum and examine
blue food systems “from bait to plate” by analyzing
food production, provisioning, and consumption as
interlinked activities. Blue food production includes
small-scale and industrial harvesting and wild capture
and aquaculture systems. Provisioning activities
link production and consumption: the offloading
of catch, storage and transportation of highly
perishable foods, transformations from raw fish to
the final product, and the marketing and distribution
affected to reach consumers. Finally, consumption
includes how we acquire our food, cook and eat it,
and dispose of waste, as well as our nutritional and
health outcomes. While conventional food policy and
science have focused on food production in isolation,
a food systems framework sheds light on dynamics
that impact the flows and distribution of foods with
equity implications: which foods are made by whom,
where does food go, and who benefits? This course
will introduce students to key changes in the goals and
means of food policy, focusing on how the emergent
dialogue on food systems in fisheries is reframing how
we know and govern aquatic resources. A significant
portion of the course will be dedicated to examining
blue food case studies, which may include: seaweed
farming in Tanzania, fishing cooperatives in Mexico,
tuna longliners in the Mid-Atlantic, and lobster fishing
in Maine. Students will work in teams to analyze
one of these case studies in-depth, applying a food
systems lens to examine each case’s sustainability and
equity challenges. Students will be evaluated through
their participation in class discussions and in-class
activities, weekly writing reflections, and co-leading a
class with your case study team. The final project will
be a group policy proposal outlining how stakeholders
could better govern from a food systems perspective
in your blue food case study.
Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: A prior course
on food systems of fisheries is beneficial, but not
required. Students will be (re)introduced to key
concepts in the first few class sessions and apply them
throughout the course. Class limit: 15. Lab fee: None

HS 3107 Community-based Climate
Solutions Lab
CLINE, KEN
Climate change poses an existential threat to life as
we know it. This class’s goal is to move beyond the
paralyzing and frustrating national and international

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

113

policy making related to climate change and to
focus on what can be done at a community level.
The broad impacts of climate change do not lend
themselves to narrow disciplinary solutions—they
require an integrated human ecological approach
that brings together multiple disciplines and varied
problem solving skills. This project-oriented course
will create the opportunity for advanced students
to study and design real-world, practical solutions
for reducing greenhouse gas emissions and
adapting to the impacts of climate change. Student
teams will design a project in collaboration with
a community, government, business, or nonprofit
partner. All projects will consider issues of feasibility,
implementation, equity, and innovation as they
design their solution. This course is practical, highly
interactive, and hands on. Experts from nonprofits,
COA staff, and the local community will be involved in
project planning and will participate in class sessions.
Lectures will provide background material pertinent
to the specific project. In addition to lectures/
discussions and regular team meetings, there will be
significant fieldwork (e.g., mapping, data collection,
meetings with experts and community liaisons,
charrettes, presentations, and collaboration with
community partners). To enroll in the class, students
need to possess the academic skills necessary to do
independent, advanced work. A background in climate
change, law, GIS, data analysis, planning, design,
ecology, economics, business, social science research,
or writing would be helpful. Physics and Mathematics
of Sustainable Energy and Environmental Law
and Policy are highly recommended. Students will
be evaluated on the quality of their group work,
participation in teams and class discussions, and
quality of written and oral presentations.
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites:
Advanced work at COA or at another college. Class
limit: 16. Lab fee: $45

HS 3108 Creative Nonfiction Workshop:
Personal into the Cultural
GREENBERG, ARIELLE
In this workshop, students will have the opportunity
to experiment with style, form and voice in the
genre of literary nonfiction, all while working
toward a lively final piece. The course will center
around three short creative nonfiction projects, all
driven by your individual interests and experiences.
The two initial projects—a personal essay/memoir
and a piece of nontraditional cultural criticism—
will inform the final one, modeled after the
irreverent and highly subjective New York Times
Letters of Recommendation feature, which places
autobiographical anecdote within a larger cultural
context. We will read short examples of each kind of
essay but the bulk of the class would be developing
and workshopping students’ own work. Students
will be guided toward finding meaningful, unusual
114

topics that suit their own passions, and will be given
instruction in the foundations of good prose writing,
including grammatical style, diction, structure and
revision strategies, all of which are useful skills for
composition and creative writing in general.
Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: Experience in
writing creative and academic prose; familiarity and
comfort with the writing workshop model. Class limit:
12. Lab fee: None

HS 3109 Food and War Part I
COLLUM, KOURTNEY
Food systems have long been globalized and
interconnected. Consequently, conflict in one part of
the world often affects food systems in other parts
of the world. Indeed, some scholars have argued
that war has made our contemporary food systems.
In this course, we will draw on the fields of food
studies, history, anthropology, international studies,
and political science to understand how war has
shaped and been shaped by past and contemporary
food systems. Designed as a two part course, Food
& War Part I focuses on World War I, World War
II, and the Cold War between the United States,
the Soviet Union, and their respective allies. We
will also examine the influence of the Cold War on
efforts to bring about a “green revolution” across
Asia in the 1950s and 1960s and across Africa
today. Throughout the term we will consider how
modern war tactics have evolved from historical
approaches to conflict, from burning and salting
fields to slaughtering livestock and wild game. As
a reading- and discussion-based course, we will
primarily examine our topic through books and peerreviewed articles as we consider the questions: How
has food been used as both a weapon of war and a
tool of diplomacy? How has conflict transformed the
ways people grow, harvest, and eat food? And how
have agricultural methods, inputs, technologies, and
cuisines spread and evolved in relationship to war?
Students will be evaluated based on preparation
for, and participation in, class discussions, a series
of synthesis papers, and a final paper. As an
intermediate seminar, this course is best suited for
students who have taken a course in food studies
such as Transforming Food Systems or US Farm &
Food Policy, and who have had at least one course
in history, anthropology, or international studies.
Students who take Food & War Part I are not required
to take Part II.
Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: This course is
best suited for students who have taken a course in
food studies such as Transforming Food Systems or
US Farm & Food Policy, and who have had at least
one course in history, anthropology, or international
studies. Class limit: 16. Lab fee: $0. Meets the
following degree requirements: HS

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

HS 4012 Contemporary Women’s Novels
WALDRON, KAREN
This course selects from among the most interesting,
diverse and well-written of contemporary women’s
fiction to focus on questions of women’s writing (and
how/whether it can be treated as a literary and formal
category), gender identity and women’s issues, the
tension between sameness and difference among
women’s experiences, and narrations of women’s
experience around the world. The course begins
by examining two relatively unknown yet rather
extraordinary novels from earlier in the twentieth
century: Alexandra Kollantai’s Love of Worker Bees
(1927) and Sawako Ariyoshi’s The Doctor’s Wife (1967).
After these, we read from truly contemporary authors
and quite varied authors published within the last 20
years, like Buchi Emecheta, Gloria Naylor, Ursula Hegi,
Nawal El Saadawi, Sue Grafton, Graciela Limon, Tsitsi
Dargarembga, Barara Yoshimoto, Dorothy Allison,
Rose Tremain, Julia Alvarez, Leslie Feinberg, April
Sinclair, and Achy Obejas. Students each choose an
additional author to study and read a novel outside
of class. An extensive list of authors is included in the
syllabus. Evaluation be based on class participation,
either two short papers or one long paper on works
discussed in class, a presentation to the class of the
outside novel, and a final evaluation essay.
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisite: a
previous literature course and signature of the
instructor. Offered every other year. Meets the
following degree requirements: HS

HS 4020 Environmentality: Power,
Knowledge, and Ecology
MCKOWN, JAMIE
Bringing critical theory directly to the gates of human
ecology, this class will approach the central issue
of how discourses of government, biopower, and
geopower have intertwined and infused themselves
within the representations of “environments” in
popular debate. With a specific nod to Foucault, Marx,
Baudrillard, Luke, and other critical social theorists,
we will tackle the various complexities that arise when
ecology become a site for political and economic
expertization.
Topics to be covered include the formation
of knowledge/power/discourse, systems of
environmentality, the rise of hyperecology, the
valorization of ecodisciplinarians, and, as Timothy
Luke puts it, “how discourses of nature, ecology
or the environment, as disciplinary articulations of
ecoknowledge, can be mobilized by professionaltechnical experts in contemporary polyarchies to
generate geopower over nature for the megatechnical
governance of modern economies and societies.”
The class will also address the question of “moving
forward,” and how these critiques can open productive
spaces for new ways of representing modernity and

ecology. The class will be highly interactive; discussion
will be the primary mode instruction, and students
will have considerable influence on the exact topics
covered. Final evaluation will based on a combination
of class participation, a series of analytical response
papers, and two long-form essays. While the class is
open to all students, those with some background in
critical theory, philosophy, or economic theory are
encouraged to attend.
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Class limit: 10. Meets
the following degree requirements: HS

HS 4022 Launching a New Venture
FRIEDLANDER, JAY
This course will cover the process of new venture
creation for students interested in creating
businesses or nonprofits with substantial social and
environmental benefit. It is designed for student
teams who have an idea and want to go through
the formal process of examining and launching the
enterprise. Topics covered in this course will include:
opportunity recognition, market research, creating
a business plan, producing financial projections, and
venture financing. As part of the course, all students
will make a formal business plan presentation.
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Class limit: 15

HS 4026 Environmental Law and Policy
CLINE, KEN
This course provides an overview of environmental
law and the role of law in shaping environmental
policy. We examine, as background, the nature
and scope of environmental, energy, and resource
problems and evaluate the various legal mechanisms
available to address those problems. The course
attempts to have students critically analyze the role
of law in setting and implementing environmental
policy. We explore traditional common law
remedies, procedural statutes such as the National
Environmental Policy Act, intricate regulatory
schemes, and market-based strategies that have
been adopted to control pollution and protect natural
resources. Students are exposed to a wide range of
environmental law problems in order to appreciate
both the advantages and limitations of law in this
context. Special attention is given to policy debates
currently underway and the use of the legal process to
foster the development of a sustainable society in the
United States. Students are required to complete four
problem sets in which they apply legal principles to a
given fact scenario.
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites:
Introduction to the Legal Process or Philosophy of the
Constitution strongly recommended. Offered at least
every other year. Class limit: 20. Lab fee $10. Meets
the following degree requirements: HS

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

115

HS 4028 Cross-Cultural American Women’s
Novels
WALDRON, KAREN
This is an intermediate/advanced course in which
students will explore in depth the connections
between and among modern and cross-cultural
women’s novels, primarily those written in the now
very multi-cultural United States. We will strive to
make connections between texts so as to better
understand the nature of and any patterns or themes
that shape women’s and cross-cultural fictional
narration. Historical perspective, cultural differences,
and gender roles will all be taken into consideration
as we analyze relatively recent women’s fiction by
such authors such as Toni Morrison, Maxine Hong
Kingston, Gloria Naylor, Linda Hogan, Julie Shikeguni,
Jamaica Kincaid, Nora Okja Keller, Cristina Garcia,
Jhumpa Lahiri, and Sigrid Nunez. Participants will
read carefully, prepare and ask questions of each
other, write frequent response papers, and carry out a
sustained independent project to be presented to the
group. The outside project will focus on one or more
additional texts that may be fictional, theoretical,
cultural, or historic. The group presentation will
put outside texts into broad cultural and historical
perspectives and/or discuss them in terms of
trends in women’s literature, immigrant literature,
women’s literature of the United States, multicultural
narratives, or some other course theme. Selection of
the outside text will give participants the opportunity
to fill in perceived gaps in their reading or explore
a particular narrative or cultural form in depth.
The reading load for this course is relatively heavy.
Evaluation will focus on preparation, participation,
insight, critical thinking, response papers, and the
outside project—both its oral presentation and
development in an appropriate form (visual, narrative,
analytic, curricular, etc.).
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: A
previous literature course and permission of the
instructor; experience withcontemporary women’s
novels recommended. Class limit: 15. Lab fee: None.
Meets the following degree requirements: HS

HS 4042 Reading the West
ANDERSON, JOHN
The spectacular range of habitats between the Pacific
Ocean and the Great Basin and Sonoran Deserts has
generated some of the most significant place-based
writing within American literature. In this intensive
field-based course students will be required to read a
range of materials dealing with key places. people, and
events in the western landscape during the summer
prior to the formal start of the course. The class will
then convene in California and begin a trek eastwards
into the Great Basin Desert, south to the Carson/
Iceberg Wilderness, Yosemite, the Hetch Hetchy
Valley and Mono Lake, and then finally southeastward
116

across the Sonoran desert to Albuquerque, New
Mexico, where students and faculty will participate
in a conference celebrating the first 50 years of the
Wilderness Act. Readings will include work by Muir,
Didion, Steinbeck, and Fremont. Evaluation will consist
of class participation, a series of essays and journal
essays, and a final term paper that will be completed
following the end of the field portion of the course.
This course will be integrated with and requires
co-enrollment in Ecology and Natural History of the
American West and Wilderness in the West.
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites:
Permission of instructor, camping/backpacking ability.
Class limit: Nine. Lab fee: $1300. Meets the following
degree requirements: HS

HS 4043 Wilderness in the West: Promise
and Problems
CLINE, KEN
Wilderness has been the clarion call for generations
of environmentalists. In a letter in support of the
Wilderness Act, writer Wallace Stegner characterized
the importance of wilderness as an essential “part
of the geography of hope.” That single phrase and
the current controversy surrounding the concept
of wilderness provide the central focus of our
explorations of wilderness in western lands. This
course examines the question of wilderness from
multiple perspectives in the hopes of providing an
understanding of both the concept and real spaces
that constitute wilderness. Through conversations
with wilderness managers, field work, and experience
in federally designated wilderness areas in national
parks, national forests, wildlife refuges, and on BLM
lands, the course will also examine what wilderness
management means on the ground in the varied
landscapes of the western United States. In this
context, we look at historical and contemporary
accounts of the value of wilderness, ecological and
cultural arguments for wilderness, and the legal
and policy difficulties of protecting wilderness.
Considerable time is spent evaluating current
criticisms of the wilderness idea and practice.
The class will culminate at a week-long national
conference celebrating the 50th anniversary of
the Wilderness Act. The 50th Anniversary National
Wilderness Conference provides an incomparable
opportunity for students to hear from and interact
with federal management agencies, academics,
recreation experts, and environmental advocacy
organizations. Presenting their final course work at
this conference will also give students an opportunity
to share their ideas and to receive valuable feedback
from this sophisticated and well-informed audience
of wilderness experts. Classwork emphasizes handson service-learning projects as well as reading,
writing, and theoretical discussions. Students will be
evaluated on journal entries, contributions to the class
discussions, response rapers, engagement in field

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

activities, questions in the field, and contributions
to group work. This course will be integrated with,
and requires co-enrollment in, Reading the West and
Ecology and Natural History of the West.
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: Ecology,
Our Public Lands, permission of instructor, and
concurrent enrollment. Class limit: 9. Lab fee: None.
Meets the following degree requirements: HS

HS 4047 Waste
VAN VLIET, NETTA
The term “waste” has varied definitions. It can
suggest excess material not put to use, garbage,
time or objects that are not made productive or
useful, and that which is thrown away. Waste is both
a verb and a noun, and the term often carries moral
or ethical undertones; time should not be wasted,
neither should food nor material goods, and of
course, life itself should not be wasted. Waste should
be reduced or transformed through consumption or
recycling. Waste can occasion disgust and outrage,
but even if less acknowledged, also fascination,
desire, and pleasure. Time spent idle is often time
considered wasted. Waste is also often understood as
destructive and as the product of destruction. At the
same time, waste can also be a necessary by product
of its opposites. Psychoanalysis has drawn attention
to feces association with gold and the notion of
the gift of waste in the formation of subjectivity.
Political economy, postcolonial studies, anthropology,
and feminist theory have all addressed histories
of abjection, notions of excrement, disposable
populations, and the ways in which humans have
dealt with literal waste and those materials and lives
that become understood as waste. In this regard,
understandings of waste have been central for
notions of value, productivity, desire, cleanliness and
filth, inside and outside, and the place of difference.
In this course, we will examine some of the varied
ways in which waste has been understood—in terms
of political economy, political theory, postcolonial
studies, and feminist theory, addressing waste in
terms of identity, the natural environment, value, and
the formation of what counts as human. Readings
will include texts by Karl Marx, Frantz Fanon, Georges
Bataille, Julia Kristeva, Sigmund Freud, Dominque
Laporte, Mary Douglas, Jacques Lacan, Norman
O. Brown, Sophia Stamatopoulou-Robbins, William
Rathje and Cullen Murphy, Kathleen Millar, Hannah
Arendt, Carl Schmitt, Kevin Bales, Paul Ricoeur,
Ranjana Khanna, and Françoise Vergès. Students
will be evaluated based on attendance, in-class
participation, reading responses, and two short
analytical essays.
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: none.
Class limit: 10. Lab fee: None. Meets the following
degree requirements: HS

HS 4052 Economic Development: Theory
and Case Studies
TAYLOR, DAVIS
Economic growth in the developing world has
lifted millions out of poverty at the same time that
misguided attempts at widespread application
of generic economic development theories has
impoverished millions. As a result of this tragedy,
new approaches and methodologies to economic
development are emerging, and represent some
of the most important, dynamic, and controversial
theories in all of economics. This course examines
these new perspectives on economic development.
We will briefly contextualize the new by reviewing
“old” economic development, then move on to
theories that emphasize very place-based, countryspecific approaches to how economies develop; this
will involve examining the specific roles of capital
accumulation, capital flows (including foreign
exchange, portfolio capital, foreign direct investment,
and microfinance), human capital, governance,
institutions (especially property rights, legal systems,
and corruption), geography and natural resource
endowments, industrial policy (e.g. free trade
versus dirigiste policies), spillovers, clustering, and
entrepreneurship. The course will involve a rigorous
mix of economic modeling, careful application of
empirical data (including both historical analysis and
cross-sectional studies; students with no exposure to
econometrics will receive a brief introduction), and
country studies. Evaluation will be based on classroom
participation, responses to reading questions, short
essays, and a final project consisting of an economic
development country study of the student’s choice
that demonstrates application of theoretical concepts
to the real world.
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: One
economics course. Class limit: 15. Lab fee: None. Meets
the following degree requirements: HS, QR

HS 4053 Economics of Cooperation,
Networks, and Trust
TAYLOR, DAVIS
Economics is slowly expanding from equilibriumbased, atomistic optimization, through dyadic
strategic interaction, to the consideration of networks
and complexity. At the same time, it is beginning
to incorporate more complex human motivations
beyond simple optimization as means of explaining
economic outcomes. This course captures these
trends by the study of the economics of cooperation,
networks, and trust. We will focus on four major
ways of understanding cooperation: individual
optimization, strategic optimization, institutions,
and embedded social relationships (networks),
and we will apply cooperation to the contexts of
commonly held resources (such as fisheries and
climate), networks and strategic alliances, and

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

117

formal economic organizations (cooperatives).
After an introduction to the relevant issues and an
examination of the standard neoclassical approach
of optimization (with cooperation as part of the
choice set), we will enrich our understanding of group
cooperation through the examination of social capital,
tacit knowledge, and common pool resources. We
will then have a brief exposure to game theoretic
approaches to conceptualizing strategic behavior,
along with graph theory as a means of conceptualizing
networks. With these tools in hand, we will examine
the role of networks in economic contexts such as
the networks of Emilia Romagna, the Mondragón
complex, and worker-owned businesses in the United
States and Canada. This course will be of interest to
students interested in business and organizational
management, natural resource management,
sociology, community development, globalization,
social movements, economic democracy, and a host of
other topics. Evaluation will be based on participation
in classroom discussions, several major assignments,
and responses to reading questions. We will
collaboratively decide on a final project; possibilities
innclude poster presentations, a community
presentation, or a jointly produced research or policy
paper.
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: One
course in college or IB economics. Class limit: 15. Lab
fee: $40. Meets the following degree requirements: HS

HS 4054 Philosophies of Love
COX, GRAY
This course investigates the intellectual history of
concepts of love that provide origins for notions of
it being central in our time. Is love the key to giving
meaning to our individual lives? Is it a transformative
power that can empower and heal us and our
societies? How are the many different concepts of it
related? To what extent are these concepts grounded
in biological, historical, philosophical or spiritual
truths—or mere reflections of collective myths, self
delusions, or manipulative deceptions? How can we
as individuals most fully realize ourselves? How can
our society best promote flourishing lives and how
can this be brought about? The theme of love winds
like an Ariadnean thread through the labyrinth of
the history of ideas about the nature of self, Other,
community, knowledge, reality, and ethics. The class
uses overview materials from intellectual historians
like de Rougemont, Singer, and May. It picks away
through central passages in that labyrinth by reading
key selections from Plato, New Testament writers,
Medieval poets, Nietzsche, de Beauvoir, Irigary,
Gandhi, King, Levinas, Thich Nhat Hanh, MortimerSandilands, pop culture, and others. Class format
relies on seminar discussion with occasional short
lectures. Goals of the course are to advance students’
abilities to critically analyze texts in context in
intellectual history, and to advance understanding of
118

nuanced ways key ideas in epistemology, metaphysics,
ethics, and social-change theories inform and are
informed by concepts including: eros, philia, agape,
courtly love (fin amour), love force/satyagraha,
romantic love, ahimsa, and compassion. Students will
be responsible for leading seminar sessions. There
will be one problem set, two short papers and a term
project presented in class as well as developed in a
final paper of 15-20 pages. Includes a lab session for
viewing films and television and discussing student
work.
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: At least
one prior course in intellectual history, philosophy or
comparable class in human studies. Class limit: 15. Lab
fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements:
HS

HS 4056 Histories of Race
LITTLE-SIEBOLD, TODD
Race as a concept was constructed in the Western
world in the early modern era as commentary on
and explanation of human differences. This class
will examine the origins of the idea of race and the
ways it is central to the creation of the modern world.
Drawing on histories of Europe and the Americas this
class will look at the different ways racialized thinking
was deployed in colonial contexts. Central themes of
the course will be the history of race as an idea, the
nature and impact of the Atlantic slave trade, how
indigenous peoples reshaped European ideas of what
it meant to be human, the construction of whiteness,
and the history of slavery in the new world. The period
covered by the class spans from the origins of race
as an idea to the late 19th century. The course will be
a hybrid of a lecture course and a readings seminar.
Students will read major works in the field and develop
an understanding of the historical background of
contemporary forms of structural inequality justified
and reinforced by racialized thinking. Students will
do a series of short assignments, lead discussion of
books, and undertake a major research paper. The
research projects will allow students to explore topics
beyond the chronological and spatial scope of the
course.
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: None.
Class limit: 12. Lab fee: $45. Meets the following
degree requirements: HS, HY

HS 4067 Ecological Economics
TAYLOR, DAVIS
This course explores selected themes in ecological
economics, which is both the economics of
sustainability and resilience as well as a paradigmatic
approach distinct from mainstream neoclassical
economics. We will use the first several weeks of the
term to define and outline ecological economics.
We will use the remainder of the term to explore

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

relevant current topics; possible themes include
climate change, fossil fuels and renewable energy,
green technology and investment, ecosystem
conservation (ecosystem services, payment for
ecosystem services), biophysical constraints to
economic growth (technological optimism/pessimism,
the precautionary principle, rebound effects and
Jevon’s Paradox), sociocultural impacts of economic
growth (consumption, happiness studies), system
dynamics (steady state economy, critical transitions in
complex systems, resiliency), common pool resources
(fisheries, climate, forests), measurement issues
(growth versus development, ecological footprint,
Index of Sustainable Economic Welfare), political
economy and political ecology (land grabbing,
violence), methodological issues (post-normal science,
transdisciplinarity), institutional arrangements, trade
and development (embodied trade in energy and
water, pollution havens), community sustainability
(localization, commoning), philosophical issues
(Buddhist economics, Gandhian economics, homo
economicus, feminist economics), and degrowth.
Evaluation will be via four short essays, a final poster
presentation, and classroom engagement.
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: one
term of economics or permission of instructor. Class
limit: 12. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree
requirements: HS

HS 4069 Leaving Capitalism
TAYLOR, DAVIS
Markets are the dominant form of economic
organization in the world today: particularly in the
Global North, the vast majority of people sell their
specialized labor to earn money, and use the money
to obtain, via markets, the goods and services they
need or desire. However, since the earliest days
of capitalistic production, there were voices that
articulated deep-seated critiques of capitalism while
finding value in non-commodified production and
consumption. These voices are still with us today,
along with those who seek to act on such critiques
by meeting much of their material needs through
non-market means such as self-production, acts
of reciprocity, and, and gift exchange. This course
examines theories, concepts, and experiences
centered on this practice of “leaving capitalism:”
seeking food, shelter, and clothing to the greatest
degree possible through non-commodified production
and consumption, in places where commodified
production and consumption are the dominant
norms. We will examine counter-hegemonic activities,
particularly homesteading, that seek to restore visible,
non-exploitive relationships to production activities,
thus challenging commodity fetishism and alienation
(in Marxist terms) and narrow definitions of economic
efficiency (in Neoclassical terms). We will lean heavily
on theories and case studies of diverse/community/
solidarity economies as articulated by JK Gibson-

Graham, Ethan Miller, and others; other topics will
include capitalism (alienation and commodification),
Buddhist/ Gandhian economics (which emphasizes
local economies, community self-reliance), work
(the nature of work, what constitutes good work),
resistance/avoidance (James C. Scott), and degrowth.
By studying and integrating these ideas as they relate
to production, consumption, and social relations, we
will also seek to redefine contemporary economics
beyond its traditional emphasis on commodity
production, restoring the “social” to this social
science. Evaluation will be based on problem sets,
participation, engagement in classroom discussions
and field experiences, and a final poster presentation.
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: One
course in economics or social theory, and permission
of instructor. Class limit: 15. Lab fee: 40. Meets the
following degree requirements: HS

HS 4079 Skills for Conflict Resolution and
Advocacy on Human Rights
WESSLER, STEPHEN L
The course provides students with skills and strategies
for conflict resolution and advocacy on human rights
and social justice issues. Students will practice leading
focus groups, facilitating conflict resolution dialogues,
conducting workshops, and developing workshop
agendas and curricula. Students will also explore
strategies for effective advocacy by examining case
studies from the instructor’s work on human rights
and social justice issues in Europe and the US and
from the work of other advocates. Advocates from
Europe or the US will present either in person or by
Skype. Students may be able to observe active conflict
resolution or advocacy projects in Maine during the
term. Students will be evaluated on their work during
practice sessions on conflict resolution and on other
skills relating to advocacy on human rights issues,
their written analysis of case studies, their final
project, and their participation in class discussions.
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites:
Coursework addressing conflict resolution or
social justice advocacy, or significant experience in
working on social justice and human rights issues
recommended. Class limit: 16. Lab fee: $25. Meets the
following degree requirement: HS

HS 4085 Writing Your Novella
CASS, BLAKE
Although the novella remains one of the most
underappreciated and misunderstood literary genres,
its structural brevity offers students the ideal form
to study how to create long-form fiction. Class time
will be primarily devoted to discussing the novellas we
have read. Texts may include Seize the Day by Saul
Bellow, The Grownup by Gillian Flynn, Neighbors by
Lilia Momple, Pedro Paramo by Juan Rulfo, and Indian

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

119

Nocturne by Antonio Tabucchi. During class, we will
look at strategies of dialogue, point-of-view, plot, and
setting. Students will learn how other writers develop
characters with precision, fluidly integrate backstory
and flashbacks into narratives, and make use of the
three narrative modes: full scene, half scene, and
summary narration.
To help establish a routine of writing, students will
sign up for daily work periods in the writing center.
Some work periods will start with a prompt to help
students focus their imaginations on specific aspects
of their stories, but most work periods will primarily
be dedicated to individual writing. By maintaining
a habit of writing and reflecting throughout the
course on their progress, students will develop a
process of writing that works for them. By the end
of the course, each student will be expected to hand
in a polished first draft ranging between 20,000 to
50,000 words. Shorter novellas will go through more
extensive revision than longer novellas. Students will
be evaluated on their participation in class and their
ability to execute narrative strategies in their novellas.
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites:
Permission of instructor; students will be asked to
share a sample of their writing. Class limit: 12. Lab fee:
None

HS 4086 Derrida and Questions of
Difference
VAN VLIET, NETTA
Algerian Jewish philosopherJacques Derrida (19302004), one of the most widely translated French
philosophers of the 20th century, developed a
body of work often referred to as deconstruction.
Derrida’s oeuvre has influenced multiple fields
and disciplines, including literature, anthropology,
philosophy, postcolonial studies, psychoanalysis,
and feminist Theory. This course will track some
of the ways in which Derrida engaged with ideas of
difference, through a focus on questions his work
poses for understandings of the human. The class will
engage with Derrida’s archive through reading some
of his early work, including essays and interviews
about the status of writing and speech, language,
and philosophy, and then move through his later
work, including his increasing focus on explicitly
political topics such as the death Peñalty, the animal,
sovereignty, and war. Although the texts we read
will be primarily Derrida’s own writing, we will also
read authors who respond to and build on Derrida’s
thought. These may include Gayatri Spivak, Ranjana
Khanna, Samir Haddad, Peggy Kamuf, and Michael
Naas, as well as texts by those with whom Derrida was
in dialogue, such as Sigmund Freud, Hélène Cixous,
Michel Foucault, Sarah Kofman, Claude Lévi-Strauss,
Karl Marx, Martin Heidegger, and Emmanuel Levinas.
As we move through Derrida’s texts and those
informed by them, we will pay particular attention to
120

questions about sexual difference, colonialism, the
human, death in relation to life, and representation.
Students will be evaluated on participation in seminar
discussions, weekly reading responses, and midterm
and final papers. There are no prerequisites for this
course, but students will be expected to conduct
close readings of challenging texts. Students are
encouraged to contact the professor with any
questions about the course and whether it is a good fit
for them.
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: None.
Class limit: 12. Lab fee: $10. Meets the following degree
requirements: HS

HS 4087 History Workshop: Wabanaki
Studies
LITTLE-SIEBOLD, TODD
This class will be an empirically-based research
seminar on the history, politics, archaeology, and
culture of Maine’s Wabanaki tribes that tackles a wide
range of issues. The class will consist of several group
projects on topics such as cataloging indigenous
place names to the loss of cultural heritage sites due
to coastal erosion. After completing several of these
projects, students will develop their own research
project on Wabanaki history and culture that they
will conceptualize, plan, and carry out. The class
will also cover the themes of colonialism, cultural
revitalization, tribal sovereignty, preservation of
cultural resources, and much more. The course will be
based on projects developed in consultation with tribal
cultural preservation specialists and tribal historians
from Maine’s Wabanaki communities. Final projects, so
long as they have a historical component, can explore
a topic of the student’s choosing in consultation with
the faculty. This class is appropriate for students
from a range of backgrounds. Previous coursework
such as Indigenous America, Native American Law,
Race and Racism in America, the Yucatán program, or
other relevant courses will be extremely helpful, and
preference will be given to students who have some
previous academic background in historical research,
Indigenous studies, and ethnography. Students who
have taken classes with a strong component of textual
analysis of historical sources are also encouraged
to take the class. Students will learn to work with
both primary and secondary sources (both written
and visual). Students will be evaluated on their
contribution to the group projects, participation in
discussion, several small assignments, and their final
project.
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites:
Permission of instructor (see description). Class
limit: 12. Lab fee: $60. Meets the following degree
requirements: HS, HY

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

HS 4088 Literature of Exile
TUROK, KATHARINE
Displacement, disappearance, deportation, exile,
and return in new writing: how do storytellers
relate, relive, and re-create displacement from war,
emigration, anti-immigration discourses, voluntary
or coerced exile, or racial, ethnic, and religious
conflicts? What emotional truths do new novels,
poems, short stories, and essays reflect—from anger,
to “otherness,” to nostalgia, to numbness—when the
self and its homeland are separated? Are one or more
homelands foundational to identity formation? How
do fiction and nonfiction convey refugee experiences
and their aftermath? Finally, how are migratory
journeys of geography and selfhood accompanied by
related trauma, impactful on different generations
and changes in the social and political spectrum—and
do they evolve as “a disassembly of the heart and
excavation of a new identity” in recent writing?
Readings include material by 21st century writers from
every continent, such as Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie,
Claire G. Coleman, Daša Drndic, Isabella Hammad,
Cristina Henríquez, Amitav Kumar, Kyun-sook Shin,
Valeria Luiselli, Geovani Martins, Imbolo Mbue, Viet
Thanh Nguyen, Julie Otsuka, Salman Rushdie, Pajtim
Statovci, and Shahla Ujayli.
Students will be assessed on engaged participation,
two short papers, one presentation in any medium,
and a final essay, story, poem, or play.
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: None.
Class limit: 15. Lab fee: None. Meets the following
degree requirements: HS

HS 4092 The Measure of Our Lives: Toni
Morrison Seminar
WALDRON, KAREN
This course will be an intermediate/advanced seminar
honoring and exploring the works of Toni Morrison
(1931–2019), an African-American author who won
the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1993, the Pulitzer
Prize for Fiction in 1988, and numerous other notable
awards. She was a giant of a public intellectual and
contemporizing figure in American Literature; her
works continue to inspire and transform readers
and scholars of all identities, although her primary
purpose was to write for Black people. As Morrison
herself said, “If there is a book that you want to read,
but it hasn’t been written yet, you must be the one to
write it.” In writing she changed the literary landscape
of the US. In particular, her poetics illustrate how
African American and especially African American
women authors express depths of meaning and
experience absolutely central to any understanding of
the complex culture and histories of the US. Another
Morrison quote hints at the profundity of her own view
of her life’s work: “We die. That may be the meaning
of life. But we do language. That may be the measure

of our lives.” These two quotes provide a framework
for the course, which seeks students interested in
language and its power, literature and its insights, and
the Black female experience. Over the course of the
term students will read through Morrison’s oeuvre of
novels (The Bluest Eye, Sula, Song of Solomon, Tar
Baby, Beloved, Jazz, Paradise, Love, A Mercy, Home,
God Help the Child) as well as a number of her key
essays and addresses (Playing in the Dark, The Source
of Self-Regard), scholarly criticism, and responses to
Morrison’s 2019 passing. There may be some division
of labor with the later novels (after Paradise), but the
course is reading intensive. Students will also prepare
frequent short written responses and a final project
responding to Morrison in some way. Evaluation will
be based on class participation, response papers,
passage analysis, and the final Morrison project to be
shared with the class.
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: Prior
literary study and permission of instructor. Class
Limit: 15. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree
requirements: HS

HS 4096 Tutorial: Creative Writing
CASS, BLAKE
This class concentrates on the theory and practice
of poetry and short fiction, though there will also
be a place for Starting Your Novel students to
finish up. Our goal is to develop the skills of verbal
craftsmanship and self-criticism. Class meetings
combine the analysis and critique of individual
student’s writing with the discussions of published
works by other writers. We also frequently discuss
matters of standards, the creative process, and the
situation of the writer in the contemporary world.
Students are expected to submit one piece each week,
to participate in class response to fellow writers, to
make revisions on all work, and to contribute their
best pieces to the printed class anthology at the end
of the term.
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites:
Permission of Instructor. Class limit: Five. Lab fee:
None. Meets the following degree requirements: HS

HS 4097 Spanish Conversation I
PEÑA, KARLA
This course develops intermediate and advanced skills
in verb use, idiom, and vocabulary. It emphasizes
Spanish competencies most relevant to work in
Latin American cultural settings. It also focuses
on developing language competencies directly
relevant to projects people are interested in pursuing
in Spanish-speaking environments. This course
presupposes competence in the simple tenses and a
basic vocabulary.
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites:
Permission of instructor. Class limit: 10. Lab Fee: $20

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

121

HS 4098 The Human Ecology of AI:
Problems and Projects
COX, GRAY
This course examines the challenges, threats and
opportunities emerging with technologies associated
with Artificial Intelligence. It will consider the nature
of intelligence in its many forms in humans and
nature and examine how these and other forms
of intelligence may be coded into emerging AI
technologies or developed through various forms of
machine learning, evolutionary programming, etc.
Sample topics include roles of AI in education, health,
agriculture, transportation, policing, military, scientific
research, the arts, spiritual traditions, religions,
government, language translation, and bridging
relations between different cultures.
Goals are to develop: understandings of the basic
programming principles, research, development
strategies and underlying philosophical assumptions
guiding development in such technologies; abilities to
use interdisciplinary, problem-centered approaches
to understand complicated vs. “wicked” problems
associated with rapid technological change and key
approaches to dealing with them; collaborative skills
for problem-centered studies and programming
projects in AI in areas of student interest; and metacognitive abilities to learn these kinds of material in
groups as well as on your own.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites:
A readiness to engage with theoretical models,
methodological techniques, basic programming, and
philosophical questions in disciplined and critical
ways. There is no specific course requirement for this
class. However, it will assume students are familiar
with at least some of the key issues raised in the
course. Permission of the instructor. Class limit:15. Lab
fee: $35. Meets the following degree requirements: HS

WALDRON, KAREN

Readings will include classic texts in AI theory,
philosophy, and futures studies as well as selections
from standard texts on AI programming like that
of Stuart Russell and Peter Norvig. We will also
use podcasts, films, and other media to pursue key
topics and trends. There will be a series of short
programming activities to study basic principles
and try modelling aspects of more complicated and/
or complex systems. These will be done, at least
initially, in block coding accessible to students without
previous programming experience. We will examine
the ways in which they can be coded in Python and
students familiar with that or other languages will be
able to pursue homework and final project work in
whatever language they may prefer.

122

Evaluation will be based on the extent to which
students demonstrate in homework, class
participation, and term projects that they have
advanced in each of the four main goals for the
course.

HS 4099 Contemporary Black Writers

Students pursue term projects individually or
collaboratively which may include: futures studies
use of methods of historical and/or social science
research to investigate some emerging AI-related
social or environmental concern; a computer
programming project that solves a practical problem,
is conducive to artistic expression, performs scientific
analysis of quantitative data, or demonstrates an
established or experimental feature of a machine
learning or otherwise AI system; or a philosophical
and/or theoretical critical analysis of underlying
concepts, values or assumptions that are at stake in
the emerging AI technologies.

Class sessions and labs will vary in format from
extended discussion of texts and problems to

supplementary lecture, visiting speakers, collaborative
coding activities, and extended project work. The class
as a group will develop at least one major hackathon
style project as a way of exploring key issues and
developing key skills.

This literature course allows students to explore
the rich world of modern and contemporary Black
writers. The texts will include those from the US
and beyond, in an attempt to sample the wide range
of fabulous prose authors (primarily novelists and
essayists) that speak from and about the experiences
of a significant segment of the world’s population.
Similarities and differences between prose styles
and narrative focus will allow us to probe aesthetic
and linguistic as well as cultural and historical
phenomena and contexts. While the emphasis will be
on works written since 2000, we will begin the term
by reading a few 20th century authors who paved
the way for the artistry which was to follow—choosing
among writers such as Ann Petry, Gwendolyn Brooks,
Octavia Butler, and James Baldwin from the US, and
Chinua Achebe, Bessie Head, and Ama Ata Aidoo
from the African continent. Earlier selections will
set us up with questions about the fiction and prose
literary articulation coming from both post-slavery
and postcolonial contexts. The remainder of the
term we will read 21st century works by authors such
as Chimamanda Ngozi Adichi, Colson Whitehead,
Ta-nehisi Coates, Yaa Gyasi, Zadie Smith, Jessmyn
Ward, and Nnedi Okorafor. Students will be evaluated
on class participation, shared discussion leading
responsibilities, and written work. Each student will
choose one of three options for written work: four
2-3 page critical analyses; two 5-7 page studies of a
particular work or theme; or a 12-15 page extended
analysis of one or two works or authors.
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: A
previous literature, history, or post-colonial course,
and permission of instructor. Class limit: 15. Lab fee:
None. Meets the following degree requirements: HS

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

HS 4100 Carbon
STABINSKY, DOREEN
Carbon is the building block of life. It is also central
to one of the most critical challenges of this century:
climate change. Combustion of fossilized carbon
leads to the increase in atmospheric concentrations
of carbon dioxide that threaten life across the planet.
Trees and other living organisms that store carbon
are celebrated as solutions to the growing crisis, yet
rampant destruction of these carbon stores continues
unabated. The global management of carbon and its
impacts includes projects to decarbonize economies
and recarbonize ecologies, as well as fantastical
technofixes for carbon removal and blocking the sun.
Who will decide how much fossil carbon ultimately
gets burned? How much land will be claimed by elites
to soak up their continued fossil emissions, and where
will it be located? What role do carbon markets and
geoengineering play in addressing or perpetuating
fossil economies? These are some of the questions we
will explore.
In the course we use several different theoretical
lenses that look at intersections of institutions,
nature, economy, and power (critical geography,
political ecology, political economy) to understand
more deeply the political, economic, and ecological
relationships that emerge around forms of carbon
(fossil fuels, trees and landscapes, monoculture
plantations) in the context of global efforts to address
climate change. Topics to be covered include: the
carbon cycle; carbon economies of coal, oil, and
gas; international climate treaties and global politics
of governing carbon; carbon markets; climate
models; geoengineering and carbon removal; carbon
democracy and fossil capital. The aim of the inquiry,
and what students should expect to take away from
the course, is experience in engaging with theoretical
texts and a broader and deeper understanding of the
global political economy and local political ecologies
of climate change and carbon. Readings will come
from academic as well as non-academic literature
from think tanks, non-governmental organizations,
and social movements. The course will be conducted
in a seminar format, with emphasis on class discussion
of readings. Students will be evaluated based on
engagement in class discussions, regular writing
assignments, leading one or more class discussions,
and a final project (podcast, presentation, or final
synthetic essay).
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: One or
more courses in natural or physical sciences, social
theory, economics and/or politics. Class limit: 12. Lab
fee: None. Meets the following degree requirements:
HS

HS 4101 Troubadours, Nuns, Concubines,
and Witches before 1500
TUROK, KATHARINE
This course traces variations in the social, legal,
political, and economic status of women in Asia and
Europe from antiquity to about 1500. Students will
examine letters, diaries, songs, artwork and artifacts,
court documents, poems, essays, and fiction primarily
by and about women. Students will also consider such
questions as: Why and to what extent did women in
some parts of the world—China, southern India, Japan,
Catalonia—experience relative freedom? What were
women’s attitudes toward sexuality, men, children,
religion, love, work, magic, and education? How was
gender negotiated, with female identity in girlhood,
adolescence, and adulthood established or modified,
within various sociocultural contexts? What were
the achievements and accomplishments of women
during these early periods, whether they managed
households and property, wandered the land as
minstrels, practiced medicine, worked at court, in
the religious life, in the visual and performing arts,
or as political leaders such as pharaohs, priests, and
emperors. Students will be evaluated on the basis
of class participation, two short papers, and one
substantial essay.
Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: None.
Class limit: 15. Lab fee: None. Meets the following
degree requirements: HS

HS 5010 Advanced Composition
KOZAK, ANNE
This course has two goals: 1) to aid the student in
developing and refining a style and 2) to make the
student cognizant of the interaction between style,
content, and audience. To achieve these goals,
students write several short papers or one or two
longer ones, meet regularly with the instructor to go
over these, edit and discuss the exercises in Style: Ten
Lessons in Clarity and Grace by Joseph Williams, and
participate in review sessions.
Level: Advanced. Prerequisites: Signature of
instructor. Offered every winter. Class limit: 8. Lab fee:
None. Meets the following degree requirements: W

HS 5012 Wildlife Law Seminar
CLINE, KEN
In his seminal essay on the “Land Ethic,” Aldo
Leopold explores the incongruity between man’s
legal structures and the natural world around him.
This incongruity is particularly acute in the area
of wildlife conservation. This course examines the
legal, philosophical, scientific, economic, and political
problems surrounding man’s relationship with other
species on this planet. The far-reaching goals and
impacts of the Endangered Species Act are a central
focus of the course. Significant time is also dedicated

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

123

to legal issues concerning marine mammals, Native
Americans’ wildlife concerns, migratory birds, animal
rights, and agencies entrusted to manage wildlife.
The growing role of international agreements
to protect migratory and commercially valuable
species is also covered. Special attention is given
to debates currently underway over reauthorizing
the Endangered Species Act and pending biological
diversity legislation. Students are engaged in a termlong project that attempts to apply the principles
of the course to a pressing wildlife issue in Maine.
Evaluation is based on class participation and
contribution to the group project.
Level: Advanced. Prerequisite: Environmental Law
and Policy or permission of the instructor. Offered
every third year. Class limit: 10. Lab fee: $15. Meets the
following degree requirements: HS

HS 5013 Methods of Teaching Writing
Across the Curriculum
CASS, BLAKE
This course not only gives students knowledge and
understanding of rhetorical theory and practice so
they can work effectively with developing writers, but
also provides them with a review of grammar, methods
of evaluating writing, and strategies for teaching
exposition, argument, and persuasion. Students put
this knowledge to practical use by working as peer
tutors in the writing center. Students participate in
this course for one academic year and receive one
credit. In addition to Williams’ Style: Ten Lessons in
Clarity and Grace and Irmscher’s Teaching Expository
Writing, students read numerous articles from College
Composition and Communication, College English,
The Writing Instructor, Language Arts, and English
Journal, and Research in the Teaching of English, as
well as a text dealing with teaching writing in their
specialty, e.g. Writing Themes about Literature or a
Short Guide to Writing about Biology.
Level: Advanced. Prerequisites: Working knowledge
of grammar and usage, excellent writing skills, ability
to work closely with people, and signature of faculty
member in writing or education. Class limit: 15. Meets
the following degree requirements: ED, W

HS 5014 Austen, Bronte, Eliot
WALDRON, KAREN
This is an advanced course which explores in depth
the works of three major writers of the Victorian
period: Jane Austen, Charlotte Bronte, and George
Eliot. The set-up of the syllabus, group meetings,
and individual projects require that participants talk
about connective factors between texts and the
development of women writers’ voices and narrative
structures during this period. Emphasis will also be
placed on the construction of the heroine, the use and
manipulation of the marriage plot, developments in
124

linguistic and narrative practice, and developments
in each author’s work—from the juvenilia to the
later fiction. Historical perspectives, gender roles,
and theoretical approaches will all be taken into
consideration as we analyze novels such as: Lady
Susan, Northanger Abbey, Persuasion (Austen); The
Professor, Villette, and Shirley (Bronte); and The
Mill on the Floss and Middlemarch (Eliot). Rather
than prepare papers and exams, participants will
prepare and ask questions of each other, develop
response papers and passage analyses, and carry out
a sustained independent project to be presented to
the group. The outside project will involve additional
research into one of the major authors, to include
both the reading of another novel, biographical
information, and critical analyses. Projects will give
participants the opportunity to explore a particular
author, question, or form in depth. The reading load
for this tutorial is very heavy. Evaluation will focus on
preparation, participation, insight, critical thinking,
and the outside project, which will be be presented
orally and developed in an analytic fashion to be
determined by the class.
Level: Advanced. Prerequisites: Permission of
instructor. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: None. Meets the
following degree requirements: HS

HS 5015 Hydro Politics in a Thirsty World
CLINE, KEN
This course will look at the complex issues
surrounding the development, distribution, use, and
control of fresh water around the world. Focusing
primarily on developing countries, we will examine
three aspects of water use and control. First, we will
look at the scope and impact of water development
projects; second, we will examine the conflicts and
solutions related to transboundary river basins; and,
third, we will consider the implication of privatization
of water resources. By way of background, we will
review the variety of demands placed on fresh
water and the political institutions related to water
development. Students will gain a solid background
in international environmental law as it relates
to multilateral and bilateral treaties, customary
law, multilateral institutions, and the guidance of
international “soft law.” They will also understand
the allocation and equity issues surrounding the
privatization of water and the political dimensions of
this shift. Ultimately, these issues will give a concrete
understanding of some aspects of the concept of
sustainable development. Evaluation will be based
on class participation, short analytical papers, and a
substantial term-long assignment.
Level: Advanced. Prerequisites: Solid background in
international politics, economics, human rights, or
development policy through coursework or personal
experience. Class limit: 20. Lab fee: $15. Meets the
following degree requirements: HS

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

HS 5017 Advanced Spanish I
PEÑA, KARLA
This course is for students who are competent
in the principal grammatical forms of Spanish. In
this class, students increase their mastery and
automatic command of grammar and nuances
of idiomatic usages, broaden their vocabulary in
general and deepen it in targeted areas, enrich their
understanding of multiple dimensions of Hispanic
culture, and increase their ability to read, write,
hear, and speak in a variety of rhetorical forms
and genres. Student are evaluated based on class
participation, homework and their ability to work
effectively with multiple kinds of texts, interviews,
conversations, formal interviews, oral presentations,
writing exercises in different styles, and nonverbal
communication. Typically offered in fall or winter.
Level: Advanced. Prerequisites: Permission of
instructor. Class limit: 10. Lab fee: $20

HS 5018 The Nature of Narrative
WALDRON, KAREN
This is an advanced, writing-focused course in which
students practice the human ecology of literary
analysis. We explore the “mind” or consciousness of
fictional writing (specifically, novels) by looking at
how narratives make meaning and at how we make
meaning from narratives. The course surveys some
of the best modern fiction, with a particular focus on
works that highlight narrative technique, stretch the
boundaries of the imagination, have a rich and deep
texture, and push against the inherent limitations
of textuality. Students also hone their reading and
analytic skills as they work closely with 20th century
texts that broke new literary ground. Some of the
authors we may read include: Joseph Conrad, Virginia
Woolf, William Faulkner, Monique Wittig, John Dos
Passos, Toni Morrison, N. Scott Momaday, Bessie
Head, Manuel Puig, and Margaret Atwood. We also
study some narrative (and possibly film) theory.
Evaluation is based on class participation, frequent
short response and passage analysis papers, and an
independent project.
Level: Advanced. Prerequisite: Signature of instructor.
Offered every other year. Class limit: 15. Meets the
following degree requirements: HS

HS 5020 Advanced International
Environmental Law Seminar
CLINE, KEN
This course is designed to provide an overview of
the use of international law in solving transnational
environmental problems and shaping international
behavior. We examine, as background, the nature and
limitations of international law as a force for change.
The course will then explore customary law, the
relationship between soft and hard law, enforcement

of international law, implementation mechanisms,
and the effectiveness of multilateral environmental
agreements. Special attention is given to existing
international environmental law frameworks
addressing climate change, Arctic and Antarctic
development, ozone depletion, biological diversity,
forest loss, export of toxic chemicals, and the host of
issues raised by the 1992 United Nations Conference
on the Environment and Development and subsequent
environmental fora. Students will also consider the
interface between international environmental law
and other important international forces such as the
Bretton Woods institutions, human rights frameworks,
and international development entities. Students
will be evaluated on the quality of their classroom
comments and several analytical problem sets
given during the term. Students will also be asked
to complete a major research project examining the
effectiveness of a treaty or a proposed international
environmental legal arrangement.
Level: Advanced. Prerequisites: Environmental Law
and Policy or Global Environmental Politics, and
signature of instructor; sophomore or higher college
level. Class limit: 10. Lab fee: $10. Meets the following
degree requirements: HS

HS 5022 Hatchery
FRIEDLANDER, JAY
The Hatchery is applied human ecology in action; it
offers students a bridge from coursework to actively
creating their vision of the future. The Hatchery gives
students from across the campus the opportunity
to move from ideas to action. Hatchery students
work either individually or in teams on a wide
array of enterprises. Past projects have included:
urban farming; international development; policy
and planning; photography and film; alternative
transportation; biofuel production; renewable
energy; food systems; the arts; furniture production;
technology development; social enterprise. Ventures
have been for profit and nonprofit, encompassing
the range from local businesses to scalable startups.
Students selected for the Hatchery are required to
devote an entire term to launching their venture. Each
Hatchery enterprise, whether a team or an individual,
must take the course for a minimum of three credits.
Along with weekly instructional meetings, students
receive office space, supplies, professional services,
mentors, and potential access to seed capital to
develop their ventures. If students decide to continue
their enterprises after the initial 10 weeks of class,
they have access to the Hatchery space and resources
for an additional nine months.
The Hatchery takes place in three phases:
Application: Students apply for a position in the
Hatchery over winter term.
Rapid prototype: The 10 weeks of the Hatchery
course. Students create a rapid prototype to test their

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

125

ventures in the marketplace. These prototypes vary
widely depending on the type of ventures.

for students of all interests. Class sessions will be
organized as a weekly three-hour seminar and will
be predominantly discussion driven. Students will
be responsible for presenting certain works and will
also lead some of our discussions. Assignments will
emphasize critical, reflective, and analytical writing.
Evaluation will be based on participation in class
discussion, short written response papers, several
longer essays, individual presentations, and a final
recovery project.

Creating an enterprise structure: During the 10 weeks
of the course, students will have weekly assignments
that introduce key elements in an organizational
structure and highlight operational considerations
that are universal amongst enterprises.
Development: The following nine months. Students
have access to the Hatchery space and resources to
continue developing their enterprises.

Level: Advanced. Prerequisites: None. Class limit:
12. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree
requirements: HS, HY

Level: Advanced. Prerequisites: Permission of
instructor. Class limit: Six. Lab fee: None. Grading is
pass/fail only.

HS 5044 Diaspora and Unbelonging

HS 5039 Equal Rights, Equal Voices: The
Rhetoric of Woman Suffrage

VAN VLIET, NETTA

MCKOWN, JAMIE
This seminar will provide an in-depth exploration of
public speech texts by a wide array of 19th century
woman suffrage activists in the United States. This
includes works by those individuals most often
associated with the first wave of the movement
including: Susan B. Anthony, Elizabeth Cady Stanton,
Sojourner Truth, Ernestine Rose, Lucy Stone, Anna
Dickinson, Lucretia Coffin Mott, Adelle Hazlett,
Victoria Woodhull, Anna Julia Cooper, and others.
There will be a heavy emphasis on the close reading of
primary source materials as students encounter these
speakers in their own words. There are five main goals
of this seminar. First, to familiarize students with the
works of prominent suffrage and equal rights activists
from the period. Second, to help illuminate how the
ideas, choices, narratives, and arguments reflected
in these texts have some relation to contemporary
discourses of gender, power, and equality. Third,
to offer students the opportunity to conduct close
textual readings of significant texts in the field of
public address. This seminar is rooted in what might
be described as an experiential, grassroots approach
to rhetorical criticism, one that is unconstrained by
the needs of overly deterministic reading strategies.
We will focus more on building a “theory of the case”
from the ground up and through the eyes of the
seminar participants, rather than subjecting each case
to the demands of a predetermined comprehensive
model of rhetorical action. The fourth goal of the
class is to offer students the first hand opportunity to
conduct their own recovery projects with the aim of
locating, transcribing, documenting, and presenting
to the class new variations of texts from the period
that have been previously undocumented or left
unaccounted for. In doing so, students will learn
basic techniques for exploring the types of digitized
historical collections that have emerged in only the
past few years. The final goal for the seminar is to
prompt an even broader series of questions about the
relationship between text, society, and the “public.”
These are questions that would obviously be salient
126

Etymologically, the word “diaspora” is traced to the
Greek dia meaning through, and speirein, meaning
to scatter or to sow. Historically, the term has been
associated with narratives of exile, displacement,
and migration, and with a sustained relation to what
is understood as an originary homeland. Although
Jewish diaspora is often the implicit or explicit
example through which diaspora is understood, the
term has been important for other cultural, ethnic,
and religious genealogies, as well as for recent efforts
to address political questions posed by contemporary
configurations of diasporic and displaced populations.
In this course, we will use questions about Jewish
difference as a point of departure for thinking about
questions of diaspora, belonging, and unbelonging
more generally. Diasporic relations raise questions
about what it means to belong to political community,
about borders between self and other and between
groups, about difference internal and external to the
polis, and about the concepts of home, homeland,
nation, and country. These questions in turn call
attention to the relation between different figures
and categories central to understandings of home
and abroad, stasis and mobility, such as citizen
and foreigner, refugee, asylum seeker. This course
examines different historical examples of conditions
and processes of diaspora by being attentive to
conditions and figures of unbelonging. In so doing, we
will consider contemporary problems of immigration,
displacement, and asylum. We will be particularly
attentive to questions about racialization, colonialism,
nationalism, gender, sexuality, and sexual difference.
The course is interdisciplinary, and we will draw
on work in postcolonial studies, political theory,
literature, anthropology, religion, and feminist theory.
Students will be evaluated based on attendance, inclass participation, reading responses, and two short
analytical essays.
Level: Advanced. Prerequisites: Ideally, students
should have taken at least three courses in
human studies and/or arts and design, or have
other background in thinking about politics and

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

representation. Students who have done independent
research and internships that engage the topics
addressed in the course description will also be
prioritized. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: $10. Meets the
following degree requirements: HS

HS 5049 Social Science Research Methods
COLLUM, KOURTNEY
This course introduces students to the process of
designing social science research, focusing specifically
on developing research questions, selecting suitable
methods, and designing the research plan. The
social sciences have a long history of debate over
the value of qualitative versus quantitative research;
operating from the position that research questions
should drive methods selection, this course covers
a range of qualitative and quantitative approaches.
Topics covered include: the link between theory and
the development of research objectives, questions,
variables, measures, and hypotheses; research design
and threats to validity; systematic data collection
procedures including surveys, semi-structured and
structured interviews, participant observation, and
cognitive methods; mixed-methods and exploratory
versus explanatory approaches; probability and nonprobability sampling; data management; numerical,
text, and narrative data analysis; and proposal design.
Students are evaluated based on class participation,
fieldwork and field notes, and a final research
proposal that integrates and applies the methods
and concepts covered in the course. This course is of
particular value for third- and fourth-year students
preparing for their senior projects.
Level: Advanced. Prerequisites: Permission of
instructor and at least two social science courses
such as anthropology, economics, media studies,
political science, psychology, or related fields. Class
limit: 12. Lab fee: $40. Meets the following degree
requirements: HS

HS 5051 Capitalism: Economics and
Institutions
TAYLOR, DAVIS
Capitalism is the dominant form of economic
institutional arrangements and production in the
world today, along with a set of culturally inflected
values and an interpretive frame for understanding
the world around us that is a crucial context for work
in human ecology. The focus of this course is on the
economic imperatives of capitalism, the resulting
institutional arrangements, and the socioeconomic
outcomes that capitalism produces; we will also
dedicate some time to the (other) cultural dimensions
of capitalism, largely through the incorporation of
guest lecturers in the latter part of the term. The
foundational economic analysis will use both Marxist
and what can be called “critical macroeconomic”
theories to understand the economic processes

and results of capitalism. Our focus will be on
contemporary capitalism, but we will briefly examine
the historical development of capitalism as a means
of understanding contemporary patterns. A major
impetus for the course is Thomas Piketty’s Capitalism
in the 21st Century, and its focus on inequality will
be a major focus of the course. Other prominent
themes will be pre-capitalist modes of production,
the labor theory of value, markets and processes of
labor commodification and alienation, the formal and
informal institutions of capitalism, money and other
forms of debt, international capitalistic relations,
crises, and variations of contemporary capitalism.
Learning will be accomplished via the reading, study,
analysis, and discussion of classic and contemporary
theories of capitalism, and applications to current
local, national, and international situations and events.
Evaluation will be based on four major problem
sets (consisting of short essay responses), a final
poster presentation, and participation in classroom
discussions and other fora.
Level: Advanced. Prerequisites: One course in
intermediate economics and one additional
intermediate course that closely relates to the study
of capitalism (e.g. another economics course, critical
theory, etc.), and permission of instructor. Class
limit: 10. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree
requirements: HS, HY

HS 5060 Food and War Part II
COLLUM, KOURTNEY
In this course, we will draw on the fields of food
studies, history, anthropology, international studies,
and political science to understand how war has
shaped and been shaped by past and contemporary
food systems. Food & War Part II focuses on case
studies of historical and contemporary wars. We
will select case studies based on the interest of
those in the class but examples might include foodbased conflict strategies used by and against First
Nations and Native American groups, and civil and
international conflicts involving Vietnam, Ethiopia,
the Sudan, Syria, Ukraine, Nicaragua, El Salvador,
Guatemala, Honduras, and the United States. As
a reading and discussion based course, we will
primarily examine our topic through books, peerreviewed articles, and news articles as we consider
the questions: How has food been used as both a
weapon of war and a tool of diplomacy? How has
conflict transformed the ways people grow, harvest,
and eat food? And how have cuisines spread and
evolved in relationship to war? Students will be
evaluated based on preparation for and participation
in class discussions, a series of synthesis papers, and
a research project on a conflict of their choice. Food
& War Part II compliments Part I but students are not
required to have taken the first course.
Level: Advances. Prerequisites: Students must have

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

127

taken a course in food studies such as Food & War Part
I, Transforming Food Systems, or U.S. Farm & Food
Policy, and would benefit from at least one course in
history, anthropology, or international studies. Class
limit: 12. Lab fee: None. Meets the following degree
requirements: HS

HS 5062 Corn and Coffee
LITTLE-SIEBOLD, TODD
This course explores the rich history of capitalism
through the lens of two of the most ubiquitous
and valuable crops in the world: corn and coffee.
The crops provide insight into the global and local
dimensions of both historical and contemporary
reality in the countries where they are grown with a
focus on Guatemala, Mexico, and the United States.
Corn and coffee provide a convenient vantage point
from which to examine the social, economic, and
cultural dynamics of community-based production
of both crops on the one hand and their globallyconnected production as commodities. The course
moves from a broad macro perspective on each
crop to an intensive exploration of how both are
produced in Guatemala. In this way, class participants
will be able to look at how global historical trends
in consumption have played themselves out in local
communities. The class will simultaneously be able to
look at the processes at work in pueblos throughout
Guatemala that root the corn economy into rich
cultural and social dynamics that are at the core of
communal life. Using these two crops as a starting
point, the class will allow students to develop a
holistic and synthetic understanding of how global
food systems land in places. The course emphasizes
attention to the broad global dimensions of corn and
coffee’s production as well as the fine-grained study
of Guatemala’s socio-cultural life in historical and
anthropological perspective. Through discussions
of the books, this seminar-style course seeks to
provide students with deep insights into the history
of a specific place while maintaining a sense of the
global and regional context. Intensive readings will
provide students with a snapshot of trends in both
history and ethnography while broader synthetic
analyses of both corn and coffee will embody more
popular approaches to the topic. Students will lead
discussions of the readings, write short synthetic
essays, and undertake a research project for the
class. Evaluation will be based on short writing,
course participation, and the final project.
Level: Advanced. Prerequisites: Signature of the
instructor, any of the following courses: Native
Empires to Nation States; Articulated Identities;
American Worlds. Class Limit: 12. Lab fee: $50. Meets
the following degree requirements: HS, HY

128

HS 6012 Learning a Language on Your Own
COX, GRAY
The goal of this course to help each student design
and implement an effective learning program for
the study of a language of their choice at whatever
level of learning they are currently at. A very
wide variety of general strategies, resources, and
practical advice for independent language learning
are reviewed in weekly class sessions along with
progress and reflection reports from each student
that can help guide and motivate independent work.
The core common text for this work will be Betty Lou
Leaver, Madeline Ehrman and Boris Shekhtman’s
Achieving Success in Second Language Acquisition.
The primary focus of the class is on the development
and implementation of each student’s individually
designed plan for learning a language of their choice.
Materials for this will be identified by each student as
part of their work on their chosen language. Progress
in these plans are discussed in one on one weekly
meetings with the teacher. Plans may include the
use of software, peer tutors, Skype, videos, standard
texts, flash cards, specialized technical material,
music, visual art, field trips, and a wide variety of
other materials as appropriate. Evaluation will be
based on the clarity, coherence, and effectiveness
of the student’s developed plan, and the discipline
with which they actually pursue it and revise it
appropriately as the term progresses. Students will
be asked to meet with the instructor prior to the start
of the term to discuss their motivation, aims, possible
resources and possible plans for language learning
after the course is over.
Level: Variable. Prerequisites: Permission of the
instructor. Class limit: 10. Lab fee: $35

HS 6013 Immersion Program in French
Language, Art, and Culture
STABINSKY, DOREEN
This course is offered through collaboration with
CAVILAM as part of the COA program in Vichy, France.
Students take 20 hours a week of language classes
and workshops taught by immersion methods and
advanced audio-visual techniques. Students live
with host families in homestays and take part in a
variety of cultural activities. They are carefully tested
and placed at levels appropriate to their ability and
are expected to advance in all four language skills—
reading, writing, speaking, and listening—as gauged by
the European Erasmus scale of competency.
Level: Beginning to advanced (depending on prior
language level). Prerequisite: at least one previous
French course and permission of instructor; this
course is intended to complement a term of COA
instruction in Vichy, France. Class limit: 12. Program
fee: $1500

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

MULTIDISCIPLINARY
MD 1015 Farm Animal Management
COLLUM, KOURTNEY
This course will provide an introduction to the basics
of farm animal care and management with a focus
on small-scale, sustainable livestock production. The
course will include readings on topics ranging from
traditional production agriculture to contemporary
sustainable livestock farming, guest lectures from
professionals within the local agricultural community
(e.g., experienced farmers, extension agents, and
veterinarians), student-led discussions of assigned
readings, and hands-on participatory learning through
visits to working farms in our area. Students will
explore the various health and nutrition needs of
common livestock, including monogastrics (hogs),
avian (poultry), ruminants (cattle, sheep, goats), and
pseudo-ruminants (horses). The course will have a
strong focus on the integration of two or more of
these livestock species on a diversified farm and will
cover pasture management and feed production.
Students will be evaluated based on attendance,
participation in class discussion and activities, short
synthesis essays, and a final project focused on the
integration of livestock into a farm setting.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: Permission of
instructor. Class limit: 10. Lab fee: $25

MD 1022 Working the Sea
ANDERSON, JOHN
For much of the past 5,000 years the sea has played
a major role in a broad variety of human cultures,
histories, arts, and economies. Seafaring peoples have
developed a rich lore and technology that allows them
to both survive and even thrive in an often hostile
element. This course will mix practical, hands-on
learning of aspects of seamanship with a survey of
fiction and nonfiction that address maritime themes.
During the early part of the term we will concentrate
on aspects of small-boat handling, using the College’s
inflatables, rowing boats, and the larger research
vessels, Osprey and Laughing Gull. Students will learn
how to launch and land small craft from docks and
beaches, basic rowing skills, and use of an outboard
motor. They will learn essential knots useful aboard
ship and on the dock, how to lay out a course using a
chart and compass, use of GPS and depth sounders,
basic rules of the road, and elements of celestial
navigation. During some lab periods we will go on
short voyages in the general area of Frenchman Bay.
As the term proceeds and weather worsens, we will
turn to an increasingly greater literary component,
reading accounts of famous voyages and local
fishermen, discoveries, battles, legends, and poetry.
Possible texts include, but are not limited to: Working
the Sea by Wendell Seavey, Master and Commander

by Patrick O’ Brian, Maiden Voyage by Tania Aebi,
The Perfect Storm by Sebastian Junger, In the Heart
of The Sea by Nathaniel Philbrick, Longitude by Dava
Sobel, Slave Ship: A Human History by Marcus Rediker,
Kon Tiki by Thor Heyerdahl, We Didn’t Mean to Go To
Sea by Arthur Ransome, as well as excerpts from The
Greenlanders’ Saga, Moby Dick, The Old Man and the
Sea, The Voyage of the Beagle, and Two Years Before
the Mast. Students will be evaluated on the basis of
class participation, a number of short quizzes—which
will include practical elements—and a term paper
focusing on one aspect of working the sea.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: Permission of
instructor. Class limit: Seven. Lab Fee $100

MD 1025 Science Visualization: Theory and
Practice
ROCK, JENNIFER
This course provides an introduction to how
science has been, and can be, visualized. It is a
multidisciplinary course in being informed by the
history and philosophy of science, neuroscience,
and different theories associated with cognition,
pedagogy, communication, design and art, as well
as ideas about the democratization of science and
science communication through both actor-network
theory/controversy mapping and co-creation/
participatory practice. Throughout, we will combine
theory with critical and creative practice. Students will
engage with the primary literature as well as online
multimedia. Students will have hands-on exercises
with specific approaches like infographics and data
visualization, as well as tackle transmedia approaches
for constructing distributed science narratives. The
final project work will investigate ways to graphically
represent the complexity of interactions within an
issue of science in society.
Evaluations will be based on three components: a
series of practical visualization exercises (collectively
worth 40% of final grade); reflective engagement with
assigned readings and multimedia material (35%);
and an individual transmedia project that maps the
components and interactions of a contemporary
science in society issue (25%). This course will be of
interest to a diversity of students, including those
interested in communicating science to the public,
those interested in issues of science in society, and
those interested in visual design and sci-art.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: Permission of
instructor. Class limit: 8. Lab fee: None

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

129

MD 1027 Primitive Skills for the 21st
Century

shared culture, defines and develops community,
and sometimes is an act of subversive and overt
revolution. This course is a sampler of the ways
sewing, in home and industry, is gendered and drives
economies. Throughout this course, we will investigate
topics like the Triangle Shirt Fire, subsequent labor
regulations, the mending movement, fast fashion,
environmental impact, and sewing as a means of
provocation and ritual. Artists such as Sonya Clark,
Nick Cave, Ruth Asawa, Bisa Butler, Do Ho Suh,
Sheila Hicks, and projects like Social Justice Sewing
Academy will be topics of discussion. Students will
make weekly individual stitched projects, and design
and contribute to a collective project. Depending on
the term, the course may also include off-campus
field trips and guest appearances from visiting
artists. This class is introductory and open to all
students irrespective of their background in sewing,
needlework, or related topics. All coursework can
be done with simple needle and thread. Evaluation
will be based on short response papers to readings/
presentations, stitched projects, a presentation
on individual research (the form of this is open),
participation in class discussions, and a final project.

JENEI, NICHOLAS PAUL
Primitive skills are the knowledge, practices, and
simple tools unique to a specific bioregion that
allowed the ancestors of modern humans to thrive
in every corner of the earth without agriculture or
industry. Knowledge of these primitive, or primary,
skills have been passed down and honed through
countless generations, and are still practiced today
as a way of connecting with our deep past, the
natural world, and a simpler, more intentional way of
life. Through this course you will learn Maine-based
primitive skills at COA Peggy Rockefeller Farms bush
camp, explore primitive skills as a global movement
and delve into its philosophical foundations, and track
the nature of your evolving relationship with, well,
nature. Together we will learn a suite of essential
bushcraft skills that are part of a millennia-old living
tradition of how to travel through and thrive in
Maine’s ecoregions and seasons. Some of the core
survival skills covered include fire making, shelter
building, foraging/hydration, and axe and knife
work. But learning how to thrive in the Maine woods
requires a very diverse set of knowledge and you
will be introduced to practical botany, cordage and
knots, canoeing, animal tracking, traditional craft,
navigation, mental preparedness, medicinal plants,
first aid, and more. We will explore these topics
through readings, videos, and practicum experiences.
The driving question of our inquiry is to explore, and
experience, the value that primitive skills bring to
contemporary life. This class will have one 1.5-hour
classroom session and one three-hour field session
per week. Additionally there will be two weekend
field trips (dates to be determined by the class).
Student evaluation will be based on practicum skill
assessments, self-reflection through journaling, and
an individual research project. This class is open to all
students regardless of their previous background or
experience with primitive or outdoor skills. However,
students will be expected to engage in moderately
strenuous physical activity, including hikes up to
4 miles, chopping and carrying wood, and building
structures out of small trees weighing up to 50lbs.
Anyone with an interest in primitive skills, outdoor
survival, place-based education, or experiential
learning would benefit from the class.

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class Limit:
12. Lab Fee: $15

MD 1029 Brewing and Business
STEIN, JON

Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class limit: 11.
Lab fee: $150

MD 1028 Needle as Sword: the Power of a
Stitch
MOSER, NIKKI

This course will cover fermentation from raw
material to final commercial production, sales, and
marketing. Drawing on the instructor’s experience as
a microbrewing entrepreneur, the class will introduce
students to all aspects of the art of fermentation/
brewing from sourcing ingredients and microbiology
to biochemistry and sensory evaluation. This content
will be blended with aspects of the business end of
producing beer and wines. Students will also learn
about branding, value-added production, and running
a small local fermentation business. The class will
include classroom lecture-based instruction, handson elements, as well as work sessions and field trips
to Fogtown Brewing in Ellsworth. Students will be
evaluated on their preparation for class, mini-projects,
and an independent final project. Students should
plan on making themselves available for classes and
work sessions outside of normal class times. Classes
such as the Art and Science of Fermentation, The
Cider Project, or The Chemistry of Food could be
helpful, but the course is intended for a broad range of
students with diverse interests who are willing to dig
into the course content.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class Limit:
12. Lab Fee: $50

Historically, a sewing sampler consisted of
examples of an individual’s handwork; it served as
a learning tool and a library of stitches, signs and
symbols. Needlework also visualizes individual and
130

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

MD 1030 Zoological Field Sketching
GRAHAM, CARRIE
This multidisciplinary course will encourage students
to develop a regular sketchbook practice using
animals as the focus of study. It is intended for any
student who wishes to improve their sketching and
observational skills, gain an understanding of animal
anatomy, and learn about local animal life. Students
will draw from museum specimens, taxidermy
mounts, and live animals using a variety of media and
techniques suitable for field sketching. Class will take
place in the Dorr Museum and at field sites within
Acadia National Park. We will also visit live animals
at locations that may include the COA farms, Acadia
Wildlife, Birdsacre, and the COA islands. The ability to
make careful observations and record them through
sketches is an invaluable tool for artists, scientists,
and other curious and creative people. Maintaining a
sketchbook can be both a professionally useful and
personally rewarding practice.
This course will meet for two three-hour sessions per
week. The first session will include a lesson about
a particular animal taxon, followed by sketching
exercises using museum specimens and mounts as
references. In the second session, students will draw
from live animals in the field. Students will also spend
approximately nine hours per week outside of class on
additional field sketching assignments, readings, and
research.
Evaluations will emphasize participation and student
growth rather than artistic ability. Our focus will
be on practice and learning to effectively record
observations, not on creating polished illustrations.
Prior experience with drawing is not required.
Level: Introductory. Prerequisites: None. Class limit:
15. Lab fee: $50

MD 2011 Fisheries, Fishermen, and Fishing
Communities
PETERSEN, CHRISTOPHER
Downeast Maine, from the Penobscot River east to the
Canadian border, includes Hancock and Washington
counties, a region of extremes between high levels of
tourism, like Mount Desert Island, and many coastal
towns that are heavily reliant on fisheries for their
economic existence. This long history of cultural
and economic dependence on fisheries makes the
region particularly vulnerable to fisheries decline,
such as the collapse of the sardine and cod fisheries.
Recent trends in the lobster, clam, scallop, and elver
fisheries, as well as aquaculture, show various levels
of instability and risk. At the same time, numerous
initiatives in the region focus on revitalizing and
stabilizing fisheries, while enhancing community
resilience. This class uses a variety of interdisciplinary approaches to examine the relationships
among marine resources, fisheries policy, harvesters,

and communities. We are interested in examining
the relationships within this linked social-ecological
system, and use historical data, current documents,
interviews and oral histories to examine the humanecological relationships among residents, policy,
and resources. We also will examine new economic
initiatives in these communities, including ecotourism,
aquaculture, and renewable energy. We have several
individuals coming to campus to discuss issues
with the class, and we will take several field trips
(including an overnight to the Cobscook Bay area) to
Downeast communities. Evaluation will be based on
several assignments during the term, including an
oral history, sets of essay questions, and research
on a fishery. Students will also work on a small group
project examining a research question using multiple
methodologies, with a presentation and paper due
at the end of the term. Active engagement during
class, with guest speakers, and on field trips will be
expected.
Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: A
class in anthropology, marine biology, fisheries, or
environmental policy, and permission of instructor.
Class limit: 15. Lab fee: $100

MD 2012 Failure
BAKER, JODI
Failure looms large in society. Is it a badge of honor, an
inextricable part of a process, a means to success, or
rather something to be feared and ashamed of? In this
course, students will explore how notions of failure
align and contrast between gender, class, and culture.
We will also explore if conceptions of failure differ
substantially among the artistic, business, and other
communities. In divergence with historical attitudes,
today’s entrepreneurs are implored to “fail cheap and
fail fast,” and events, like FailCon, celebrate failure
as a badge of honor. In art failure is simply inherent
to process. And yet, the fear and sting of failure is
real for everyone. Through a series of practicums,
readings, guest lectures, and discussions this class
will explore various aspects of failure. Students will be
evaluated on class participation, a series of solo and
group projects, selections from a failure journal, and
contributions to a shared class blog.
Level: Introductory/Intermediate. Prerequisites: None.
Class limit: 15. Lab fee: $50

MD 3010 Biology Through the Lens
RESSEL, STEPHEN
Photography is one of the primary means through
which scientific observation and research is conducted
and presented to the public. But the most provocative
images of the natural world don’t just happen; they
are made by individuals skilled in both photography
and the life sciences. In this course, students will
develop technical, observational, and aesthetic skills

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

131

MD 3013 Sheep to Shawl

to extract relevant information from the natural
world and organisms collected from nature. Through
acquired skills, students will be expected to conceive
methods to document the biological world and
communicate concepts using strong visual imagery.
Photographic techniques and historical examples will
be learned and applied. Students will be evaluated
based on their successful completion of a series of
project-based assignments, participation in critiques,
and their ability to effectively convey biological
principles through photography.

LETCHER, SUSAN

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites:
Permission of instructor. Students will be expected
to provide their own camera for use in the course;
a digital camera with interchangeable lenses is
recommended. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: $110

MD 3012 The Anthropocene
HALL, SARAH; VAN VLIET, NETTA
This course considers the definition of the human in
terms of the politics of climate change and discussions
about the notion of the Anthropocene by staging an
encounter between the discipline of geology and work
in the humanities. Suggestions by scientists over the
last few decades that human activity on the planet
has attained geological force led Nobel Laureate
Paul Crutzen to argue in 2000 that the current
epoch should be called the “Anthropocene.” Others
challenge this suggestion, pointing out that humans
have long left traces on the earth. Discussions about
the Anthropocene are tied to the challenge of how
to respond to the effects of human-induced climate
change, including the threat of human extinction.
This course will address questions such as: How do
scientists and humanists engage with policy and
scholarship about climate change? What are their
central questions and key terms? We will consider
how understandings of geological time and the stories
rocks tell might inform thinking in the humanities
about climate change. In turn, we will consider how
humanist questions about the definition of the human
might inform the ways in which science interfaces with
politics and policy regarding climate change.
This course is co-taught by a geologist and an
anthropologist, and will be an exercise in translation
between very different fields. Class material will
include laboratory activities, seminar discussions,
and close readings of texts in postcolonial studies,
geology, anthropology, and literature. Students will
be assessed based on class participation, reading
responses, laboratory activities, and a final project.
Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: None, but
preference will be given to those who have had prior
course work in either anthropology or geology.
Permission of instructor required. Class limit: 16. Lab
fee: $10

132

Sheep play profoundly important roles in human
societies. This course is a human-ecological
exploration of sheep and wool, combined with a
hands-on component in which we will work with sheep
and learn fiber arts. This class will meet for one
studio session and two lecture/discussion sections
per week, plus at least one Saturday field trip. In
the studio sessions, we will study sheep husbandry
through visits to Peggy Rockefeller Farms and learn
a variety of techniques for working with wool, from
the preparation (shearing, washing, and carding) to
spinning and working with yarn (including knitting,
crochet, and weaving). The lecture/discussion
sessions will cover topics such as the ecological
impacts of sheep in different parts of the world, the
physics of spinning and the chemistry of dyes, and
the symbolism of sheep in the mythology of different
cultures. The course will draw on a wide range of
material and intellectual approaches, with sheep and
wool as the unifying theme. Students will be evaluated
based on participation, short written assignments,
and a final oral presentation.
No prior knowledge of fiber craft is necessary,
but students who come in knowing one of the
basic techniques may be able to explore advanced
techniques like lacework or design in three
dimensions. Students should meet with the instructor
before spring break to discuss goals and equipment
needs for the studio sessions. Some basic supplies
will be provided, but students should plan to purchase
additional equipment such as knitting needles
depending on the projects that they choose.
Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: Permission of
instructor. Class limit: 10. Lab fee: $100

MD 3014 Museum Practicum
COLBERT, DRU
This course offers students the opportunity to
participate in the authorship, design, and fabrication
of interpretive projects in COA George B. Dorr
Museum of Natural History. Typically coursework
surrounds the creation of educational environments,
activities, and events that showcase concepts and
content on changing special topics. Areas of content
explored in projects range between art, science,
and natural history. With guidance, students in the
tutorial will engage in researching content, developing
interpretive projects, writing textual elements, and
designing and fabricating installations, events, and
activities in the museum. The class will act as a team
and collaborate to develop and produce material.
Evaluation will be based on (dependent on specific
tasks that include research, writing, and fabrication):
attention to detail, quality of craft, effective
collaboration in an iterative group process, and the

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

timely completion of work. The success of this group
project is dependent upon a high level of scholarship
and crafting of exhibit areas toward an end-ofterm completion date for the realization of project
elements. This course is appropriate for students
interested in education, design, and communication.
Level: Intermediate. Prerequisite: Permission
of instructor; Curiosity and Wonder is strongly
recommended; graphic design, communicating
science and/or education courses are also suitable
previous coursework. Class limit: 10. Lab fee: None

MD 3015 Green Building through the Lens
of LEED
GIBSON, DAVID
Every day, we live, work, study, eat, play, relax, and
sleep in buildings. Americans spend ~87% of our time
inside buildings. What makes a building sustainable?
This course will be an exploration of green building
concepts, materials, and best practices. We will use
the US Green Building Council’s Leadership in Energy
and Environmental Design (LEED) certification process
as a framework for understanding buildings, including
their materials, energy use, water consumption, site
location, occupant health, and interconnection with
the surrounding community. LEED is the most widely
used green building certification in the world, with
more than 110,000 certified projects representing 24
billion square feet of building space.
This course will include field trips to local building
projects and/or building material producers,
presentation(s) from architects or design
professionals, reading core LEED materials,
independent research, and group projects. Students
will apply their knowledge to building projects on
or off campus. Students will be evaluated based
on participation in class, completion of homework
assignments, and group projects/presentations.
Students who complete this course will be prepared
for the LEED Green Associate exam and certification
($100 cost to complete certification). This course
is designed for students interested in construction,
design, sustainability, community planning, climate
resiliency, and touches on an array of other subject
areas.
Level: Intermediate. Prerequisites: Physics & Math of
Sustainable Energy or permission of instructor. Class
limit: 12. Lab fee: $50

MD 3016 Origins: History, Genetics, and
Memory
LITTLE-SIEBOLD, TODD; HESS, HELEN
Families are a touchstone of many people’s identities,
and stories about where we come from and who
came before us are often key ways of orienting
ourselves and understanding who we are. Storytelling,
documentary and photographic collections, and

other methods of preserving memories serve as the
very concrete ways that many of us come to learn
about our immediate family and our ancestors. New
techniques of genetic testing provide a method that
can contribute to that understanding and in some
cases fill in blanks left about ancestors and provide
a new source of stories in addition to those passed
along from generation to generation. Recreational
DNA testing can also provoke discussion about how
to make sense of the genetic stories revealed and
how they mesh with or challenge people’s sense of
themselves. This class will explore the traditional
methods of collecting family histories (oral history,
genealogical research) and recreational genetic
testing as a point of entry into complex issues around
history, memory, ethics, race, and the role of new
technologies. Students will learn the basic skills of
doing genealogical research as well as develop an
understanding of the strengths and limitations of
human genetic testing, which can reveal our shared
history as well as our differences. Evaluation will be
based on class participation, short assignments, and
a final project. The expectations surrounding the
final project explain why this course is designated
as intermediate even though there are no specific
prerequisites. Students will be expected to
conceptualize, plan, and carry out their own projects,
and they will be evaluated on their ability to selfdirect, seek feedback, and complete those projects.
This class is appropriate for a wide range of students
with diverse interests concerning identity and history.
Level: Intermediate. Prerequisite: None. Class limit: 15.
Lab fee: None

MD 4013 Demons from the Depths
ANDERSON, JOHN
Across a range of epochs, cultures, and territories,
human beings have proffered myths, stories, and
scientific theories in order to explain catastrophic
natural events. From kata=down, strephein=turn,
the Greek katastrephein meant “under-turning” in
the ancient world. This course explores postulations
regarding large- and small-scale calamitous events
that seem to originate from below the surface of
Earth. Our enquiry engages with legendary tales,
historical records, material culture, and scientific
discourses that document attempts to explain the
meaning and/or mechanism of such memorable
episodes. What causes a mountain to eject ash and
toxic gases? What infernal force creates lava flow?
Why does the earth shake? Why do some natural
waters cause harm? How do we understand that which
we cannot see? Through case studies informed by the
literature of science, the arts, and humanities, we will
plumb the depths and limits of the human imagination.
This class uses both a lecture-based and seminar-style
discussion approach as well as time spent visiting local
lab and field sites. Students will be evaluated based on
their weekly activities and writing assignments, and a

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

133

final project with both oral and written presentation
components.

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: Physics
and Mathematics of Sustainable Energy. Class limit: 12.
Lab fee: $50

Level: Intermediate/Advanced. Prerequisites: At least
one previous class in either art history or literature
is required; an additional class in, or knowledge of,
geoscience is strongly suggested. Permission of
instructor. Class limit: 12. Lab fee: None. Meets the
following degree requirements: HY

MD 5012 Politics, Body, Representation
BAKER, JODI; VAN VLIET, NETTA

MD 4014 Building Science and Energy
Auditing
GIBSON, DAVID
Buildings account for nearly 40% of global carbon
emissions. Sixty percent of Maine homes are heated
with heating oil, the highest percentage of any state,
and Mainers spend more than a billion dollars on
heating oil each year. Improving the efficiency of our
homes and buildings is essential for transitioning away
from fossil fuels and reducing carbon emissions.
In this course, students will learn how to safely
transition buildings away from fossil fuels. This
includes understanding the science of energy
and moisture movement through a building, how
to monitor carbon monoxide and other harmful
combustion gases, and methods to reduce energy loss
while maintaining comfortable levels of humidity and
fresh air. Students will gain proficiency measuring air
leakage with a blower door, using an infrared camera
to assess insulation levels, calculating heat loss, and
identifying solutions and best practices to develop a
plan of action for homeowners.
They will also learn about high efficiency mechanical
systems like air source heat pumps, heat pump water
heaters, and how to assess lighting and appliance
electrical usage. Students will learn how to carry out
cost calculations for energy savings and research and
share information on rebates and incentives available
for homeowners. This will be a very hands-on course,
with weekly labs to teach energy auditing field skills.
This course will include presentations from local
energy contractors, and students will participate
in energy audits of residential buildings on or off
campus. Through these experiences, students will
meet and interact with home performance businesses
and nonprofit organizations in the local community.
As time and weather conditions permit, students will
gain experience implementing efficiency solutions
such as insulation and air sealing.
Students who successfully complete this course
will be able to conduct energy audits for homes,
identify cost-effective improvements, and prioritize
energy improvements to maximize energy savings.
This course will provide students with the tools
and experience to reduce building energy use and
greenhouse gas emissions in a holistic, whole-building
approach. Evaluation will be based on completion of
assignments, participation in class discussions, and
mastery of field skills.
134

Drawing on performance studies, movement training,
postcolonial studies, and feminist theory, this class
will investigate understandings of what is made
to count as “political” in relation to claims about
representation and the body. Over the course of
the term, we will investigate and produce a range of
conditions through which we consider ideas about
responsibility, decision, the unknown and unexpected,
repetition and difference, translation and dialogue,
and relations of individual to group. We will do so
through learning about the ways in which bodies
matter in the fields of theatre, anthropology, and
literature. Both anthropology and theatre are often
presumed to be vehicles for representation and for
political change, but they have also posed questions
about how the body challenges assumptions about
representation and politics. This course will grapple
with assumptions that politics is primarily about
representation, speaking in “one’s own name,” or
in the name of others. We will take questions about
representation and its limits as a point of departure to
consider the significance of the body (and bodies) for
understandings of politics. We will focus on questions
of affect, the sensory, proximity, temporality, scale,
and place. In so doing, we will consider the idea of
politics as based on a relation and response to an
other, rather than on representation. In turn, we will
address questions about the relationship between art
and politics. Classes will include movement training
practices and seminar discussion. Course materials
may include works by Hannah Arendt, Anne Bogart,
Charlie Chaplin, Charles Darwin, Jacques Derrida,
Sarah DeLappe, Cornelius Eady, Shoshana Felman,
Sigmund Freud, Brandon Jacobs-Jenkins, Valeria
Luiselli, Jean-Luc Nancy, William Shakespeare,
Sophocles, Tadashi Suzuki, and Anna Tsing. Students
will be evaluated based on class participation,
collaborative group projects, seminar discussion,
short topic responses, and a final project.
Level: Advanced. Prerequisites: permission of
instructor; priority will be given to students who
have successfully completed advanced coursework in
literature, anthropology or performance atudies. Class
limit: 12. Lab fee: $50

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

INDEX BY COURSE TITLE
Course number indicates level as follows: 1000 Introductory; 2000 Introductory/Intermediate; 3000
Intermediate; 4000 Intermediate/Advanced; 5000 Advanced; 6000 Independent work (Internships,
Residencies, Independent Studies); 8000 Graduate.
NUMBER TITLE

FACULTY

PAGE

AD 2012

3D Studio: Introduction to Three-Dimensional Art and Design

COLBERT, DRU

43

HS 3099

A History of God: Mysticism, Metaphysics, Politics, and Nature

COX, GRAY

111

HS 1032

Acadia: Exploring the National Park Idea

CLINE, KEN

83

AD 4013

Activating Spaces: Installation Art

COLBERT, DRU

50

AD 4034 Actor Training II

BAKER, JODI

51

HS 5010

Advanced Composition

KOZAK, ANNE

123

HS 5020

Advanced International Environmental Law Seminar

CLINE, KEN

124

HS 5017

Advanced Spanish I

PEÑA, KARLA

124

AD 5032

Advanced Studio Printmaking

CLINGER, CATHERINE

53

ES 4059

Advanced Topics in Marine Mammal Biology

TODD, SEAN

77

ED 1019

Advocacy and Education for English Learners

CHIEN, MING-TSO

56

HS 3015

African American Literature

WALDRON, KAREN

102

ES 3010

Agroecology

MORSE, SUZANNE

69

AD 3020

American Dreaming: Theatre and Activism in the US

BAKER, JODI

47

HS 1101

American Exceptionalism: Land of Liberty, Built on Slavery

BLAINE, JAMES

91

ES 4063

Analytical Chemistry

HUDSON, REUBEN

79

ES 4040 Animal Behavior

ANDERSON, JOHN

76

HS 1075

Animals and Ethics

LAKEY, HEATHER

86

AD 3013

Animation

ANDREWS, NANCY

46

AD 5017

Animation II

ANDREWS, NANCY

52

ES 2045

Applied Data Science

SHANK, KYLE S

68

ES 4062

Applied Data Science II

SHANK, KYLE S

78

AD 1062

Architecture in the Expanded Field

LOCK, TIMOTHY

41

HS 3104

Are you down with the cause?: Student Activism in Higher Ed

BLANSETT, RACHEL

112

ES 2020

Art and Science of Fermented Foods

MORSE, SUZANNE

66

AD 3015

Art of the Puppet

ANDREWS, NANCY

46

AD 1044

Audio Production and Engineering

SOARES, ZACHARY

38

HS 5014

Austen, Bronte, Eliot

WALDRON, KAREN

123

HS 3073

Bees and Society

COLLUM, KOURTNEY

107

AD 1056

Beginning Contemporary Dance Technique

ROBBINS, DANI

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

39
135

HS 1019

Beginning Spanish I

PEÑA, KARLA

82

HS 1073

Beginning Spanish I with Vocabulary

PEÑA, KARLA

86

HS 1020

Beginning Spanish II

PEÑA, KARLA

82

ES 4049

Biochemistry

HUDSON, REUBEN

77

MD 3010

Biology Through the Lens

RESSEL, STEPHEN

131

ES 1052

Biology: Cellular Processes of Life

STAFF

62

ES 1054

Biology: Form and Function

STAFF

63

ES 4010

Biomechanics

HESS, HELEN

74

ES 4048 Biostatistics

LETCHER, SUSAN

76

AD 3077

Black Atlantic Music

HENDERSON, JONATHAN

48

HS 3106

Blue Food Systems

SMITH, HILLARY

112

MD 1029

Brewing and Business

STEIN, JON

ES 3037

Bryophyte Biology: Mosses and their Allies

OLDAY, FRED

HS 1097

Buddhist Philosophies

LAKEY, HEATHER

90

MD 4014

Building Science and Energy Auditing

GIBSON, DAVID

133

HS 1025

Business and Non-Profit Basics

FRIEDLANDER, JAY

83

ES 1024

Calculus I

FELDMAN, DAVID

61

ES 3012

Calculus II

FELDMAN, DAVID

69

ES 3028

Calculus III: Multivariable Calculus

FELDMAN, DAVID

70

HS 5051

Capitalism: Economics and Institutions

TAYLOR, DAVIS

126

HS 4100

Carbon

STABINSKY, DOREEN

122

AD 1039

Ceramics I

MANN, ROCKY

38

ED 1013

Changing Schools, Changing Society

TAI, BONNIE

55

ES 1072

Chemistry and Biology of Food and Drink

HUDSON, REUBEN

63

ES 1066

Chemistry I

HUDSON, REUBEN

63

ES 1030

Chemistry II

HUDSON, REUBEN

62

ED 1014

Child Development

ALEX, JOANNE

55

ED 1011

Children’s Literature

SWEENEY, MERYL

54

AD 1052

Cinematic Visions from Marginalized Peoples

CAPERS, COLIN

39

ES 1082

Climate and Seasons: Maple Production

HUDSON, REUBEN

65

ES 3044

Climate and Weather

HALL, SARAH

HS 1054

Climate Justice

STABINSKY, DOREEN

84

HS 2110

College Seminar: Barbed Wires, Drawn Lines

TANEJA, PALAK

101

HS 2078

College Seminar: City/Country in US Literature 1860-1920

WALDRON, KAREN

96

ES 2044

College Seminar: Ecology: Natural History

RESSEL, STEPHEN

68

136

130
71

71

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

HS 3085

College Seminar: Nutritional Anthropology

COLLUM, KOURTNEY

HS 1064

College Seminar: Practical Skills in Community Development

BEARD, RONALD

HS 3079

College Seminar: The Anthropology of Food

COLLUM, KOURTNEY

HS 1076

College Seminar: Truth

COX, GRAY

86

HS 1084

College Seminar: Utopia/Dystopia

LAKEY, HEATHER

87

HS 1100

College Seminar: Writing the Environment

CAPEN, JOHN

91

HS 3039

Communicating Science

ROCK, JENNIFER

HS 3107

Community-based Climate Solutions Lab

CLINE, KEN

113

ES 5012

Conservation Biology

ANDERSON, JOHN

79

HS 2056

Constitutional Law: Civil Rights and Liberties

SEDDIG, ROBERT

94

AD 2013

Constructing Visual Narrative

COLBERT, DRU

43

AD 2029

Contemporary Artist as Researcher and Activist

CLINGER, CATHERINE

45

HS 4099 Contemporary Black Writers

WALDRON, KAREN

122

AD 1065

Contemporary Dance Composition

ROBBINS, DANI

42

HS 4012

Contemporary Women’s Novels

WALDRON, KAREN

114

HS 5062

Corn and Coffee

LITTLE-SIEBOLD, TODD

127

AD 3081

Craft Ecologies: Mount Desert Island

DOWNING, E. SAFFRONIA

49

HS 3108

Creative Nonfiction Workshop: Personal into the Cultural

GREENBERG, ARIELLE

113

AD 2036

Critical Making and New Media Art

KARRIEM, QURAN

45

ES 4026

Cross Kingdom Interactions

MORSE, SUZANNE

75

HS 4028

Cross-Cultural American Women’s Novels

WALDRON, KAREN

115

AD 2014

Curiosity and Wonder: Design and Interpretation in the Museum

COLBERT, DRU

43

ED 5010

Curriculum Design and Assessment

TAI, BONNIE

59

ES 1085

Data Science I: Visualization

BAKER, LAURIE

65

MD 4013

Demons from the Depths

ANDERSON, JOHN

133

HS 4086 Derrida and Questions of Difference

VAN VLIET, NETTA

119

HS 5044 Diaspora and Unbelonging

VAN VLIET, NETTA

126

ED 2010

Disability Rights in Education

RABASCA, ADAM

57

AD 1058

Dissecting Popular Music

HENDERSON, JONATHAN

40

AD 3012

Documentary Video Studio

ANDREWS, NANCY

45

AD 3017

Dramatic Writing for Stage and Screen

LEPICO, ANDREA

46

AD 2017

Drawing Mineral and Botanical Matter in the Forest of Maine

CLINGER, CATHERINE

44

ES 3094

Dynamic Landscapes

HALL, SARAH

73

HS 4067

Ecological Economics

TAYLOR, DAVIS

118

ES 3014

Ecology

ANDERSON, JOHN

69

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

109
85
109

105

137

ES 4038

Ecology and Natural History of the American West

ANDERSON, JOHN

75

ES 2010

Ecology: Natural History

SWANN, SCOTT

66

HS 4052

Economic Development: Theory and Case Studies

TAYLOR, DAVIS

117

HS 4053

Economics of Cooperation, Networks, and Trust

TAYLOR, DAVIS

117

ES 4053

Ecosystem Ecology

LETCHER, SUSAN

77

ED 1015

Educational Innovation

FULLER, LINDA

55

HS 1011

Environmental History

LITTLE-SIEBOLD, TODD

81

HS 4026

Environmental Law and Policy

CLINE, KEN

115

HS 4020 Environmentality: Power, Knowledge, and Ecology

MCKOWN, JAMIE

114

HS 1102

Equal Rights, Equal Voices: Articulating Suffrage

MCKOWN, JAMIE

91

HS 5039

Equal Rights, Equal Voices: The Rhetoric of Woman Suffrage

MCKOWN, JAMIE

125

ED 2011

Equity and Social Justice in Education

CHIEN, MING-TSO

57

HS 1052

Ethnographic Methods

VAN VLIET, NETTA

84

HS 1077

Ethnographic Writing

VAN VLIET, NETTA

87

HS 2084 European Political Institutions

STABINSKY, DOREEN

97

ED 1010

Experiential Education

TAI, BONNIE

54

HS 2057

Fail Better: Writing Short Fiction

MAHONEY, DANIEL

94

MD 2012

Failure

BAKER, JODI

131

MD 1015

Farm Animal Management

COLLUM, KOURTNEY

HS 1014

Feminist Theory in a Transnational Frame I

VAN VLIET, NETTA

82

HS 3083

Feminist Theory in a Transnational Frame II

VAN VLIET, NETTA

109

HS 2097

Fiction Writing: Crafting Believable Characters

CASS, BLAKE

99

AD 1036

Figure Drawing

HILBERT, FRANCE

37

AD 2022

Film Theory

CAPERS, COLIN

44

MD 2011

Fisheries, Fishermen, and Fishing Communities

PETERSEN, CHRISTOPHER 130

HS 3109

Food and War Part I

COLLUM, KOURTNEY

114

HS 5060 Food and War Part II

COLLUM, KOURTNEY

127

AD 1019

Four-Dimensional Studio

ANDREWS, NANCY

37

HS 1013

From Native Empires to Nation States

LITTLE-SIEBOLD, TODD

81

ES 3061

Functional Plant Morphology

MORSE, SUZANNE

71

AD 1059

Fundamentals of Sculpting: Sculpting the Head

HILBERT, FRANCE

40

ES 1014

Gardens and Greenhouses:Theory/Practice of Organic Gardening

MORSE, SUZANNE

60

HS 2038

Gender, Politics, and Nature in Folk/Fairy Tales of the World

TUROK, KATHARINE

93

ES 3032

Genetics

HESS, HELEN

70

HS 3069

Genocide, Resistance, Response, and Reconciliation

WESSLER, STEPHEN L

138

128

107

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

HS 2020

Geographic Information Systems I: Foundations and Applications

LONGSWORTH, GORDON

92

ES 1042

Geology and Humanity

HALL, SARAH

62

ES 1038

Geology of Mount Desert Island

HALL, SARAH

62

ES 1075

Geology of National Parks

HALL, SARAH

64

HS 1042

Globalization/Anti-Globalization

VAN VLIET, NETTA

83

AD 5014

Graphic Attack: Advanced Graphic Design Studio II

MENDEZ, KHRISTIAN E

52

AD 2011

Graphic Design Studio I: Visual Communication

COLBERT, DRU

42

AD 4014

Graphic Design Studio II: Digital Projects

COLBERT, DRU

50

MD 3015

Green Building Through the Lens of LEED

GIBSON, DAVID

132

HS 5022

Hatchery

FRIEDLANDER, JAY

125

HS 2063

Hate Crimes in the Contemporary US and Europe

WESSLER, STEPHEN L

95

ES 3018

Herpetology

RESSEL, STEPHEN

69

HS 4056 Histories of Race

LITTLE-SIEBOLD, TODD

118

HS 3040 History of Agriculture: Apples

LITTLE-SIEBOLD, TODD

105

AD 3018

History of Filmmaking II (1946-Present)

CAPERS, COLIN

47

AD 2020

History of Photography

WINER, JOSHUA

44

HS 1021

History of the American Conservation Movement

CLINE, KEN

82

AD 1038

History of Video Art

CAPERS, COLIN

38

HS 4087 History Workshop: Wabanaki Studies

LITTLE-SIEBOLD, TODD

120

ES 4018

Human Anatomy and Physiology I

ANDERSON, JOHN

75

HE 1010

Human Ecology Core Course

STAFF

81

HS 5015

Hydro Politics in a Thirsty World

CLINE, KEN

HS 2021

Immersion Practica in Spanish and Yucatecan Culture

PEÑA, KARLA

HS 6013

Immersion Program in French Language, Art, and Culture

STABINSKY, DOREEN

124
93
128

AD 4035 Improvisation in Music

BLOTNICK, RYAN

52

HS 2061

Indigenous America

LITTLE-SIEBOLD, TODD

95

HS 2107

Indigenous Peoples, Climate Change, and Power

LITTLE-SIEBOLD, TODD

100

ED 4012

Integrated Methods IA: Grades K-4 Reading and Writing

CURRAN SARGENT, LYNN

58

ED 4013

Integrated Methods IB: Grades 5-8 Reading and Writing

FULLER, LINDA

58

ED 5011

Integrated Methods II: Science, Math, and Social Studies

FULLER, LINDA

59

HS 1098

Intercultural Communication

CHIEN, MING-TSO

90

AD 3032

Intermediate Ceramics

MANN, ROCKY

48

AD 3080 Intermediate Projects in Photography

WINER, JOSHUA

49

HS 3022

Intermediate Spanish II

PEÑA, KARLA

102

HS 3023

International Wildlife Policy and Protected Areas

CLINE, KEN

102

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

139

HS 1053

Intimate Partner Violence: Dynamics and Community Response

GAGNON DA SILVA, PAMELA 84

HS 0958 Introduction to Academic Writing

CASS, BLAKE

81

ED 1016

Introduction to Adolescent Psychology

HILL, KENNETH

56

HS 1096

Introduction to Art Therapy

CHERMAK, HILARY

89

ES 1026

Introduction to Chaos and Fractals

FELDMAN, DAVID

61

AD 1032

Introduction to Contemporary Dance and Composition

ROBBINS, DANI

37

HS 1046

Introduction to Economics and the Economy

TAYLOR, DAVIS

83

HS 1091

Introduction to Feminist Therapy: Practices and Principles

GAGNON DA SILVA, PAMELA 88

ES 1086

Introduction to Field Sampling: Collection to Data Points

HUDSON, REUBEN

65

HS 2083

Introduction to Journalism: Telling the Story

LEVIN, ROBERT

97

HS 1099

Introduction to Natural Resources Management

MALTZ, ERICA

90

ES 3088

Introduction to Neurobiology

HAYNES, NICHOLAS

73

ES 1022

Introduction to Oceanography

TODD, SEAN

61

AD 1066

Introduction to Painting

BEACH, DESMOND

42

HS 2098

Introduction to Philosophy of Mind

JACOBY, FRANKLIN R

99

AD 1026

Introduction to Photography

WINER, JOSHUA

37

HS 1095

Introduction to Postcolonialism

TANEJA, PALAK

89

HS 1085

Introduction to Sexual Health

MAGNUSON, MADALYNNE

87

ES 2012

Introduction to Statistics and Research Design

TODD, SEAN

66

HS 1012

Introduction to the Legal Process

CLINE, KEN

81

ES 2037

Introductory Entomology

GRAHAM, CARRIE

67

ES 3020

Invertebrate Zoology

HESS, HELEN

70

ES 4016

Island Life

ANDERSON, JOHN

74

AD 3079

Jazz Manouche

HENDERSON, JONATHAN

49

AD 1055

Kinetic Sculpture Introduction

TARDIE, HANNAH

39

HS 2113

Latin American Literature: Pablo Neruda—Residencia En La Tie

MAHONEY, DANIEL

102

HS 4022

Launching a New Venture

FRIEDLANDER, JAY

115

HS 6012

Learning a Language on Your Own

COX, GRAY

128

ED 1022

Learning in the Arts through Exploration

SHUTT, CAROL

56

HS 4069 Leaving Capitalism

TAYLOR, DAVIS

118

ES 1083

Lichen Biology

OLDAY, FRED

65

HS 2076

Life Stories: Memory, Family, and Place

DONOVAN, MARTHA

96

ES 3083

Linear Algebra with Applications to Differential Equations

FELDMAN, DAVID

72

HS 3068 Linguistics, Language, and Culture: Human Ecological Approach

COX, GRAY

106

HS 4088 Literature of Exile

TUROK, KATHARINE

120

140

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

HS 2010

Literature, Science, and Spirituality

WALDRON, KAREN

92

HS 2071

Little Magazines: Seminar in Contemporary Literary Publishing

MAHONEY, DANIEL

95

AD 5033

Making Art: Effort, Resilience, Persistence

ANDREWS, NANCY

53

ES 4060

Mammalogy

ANDERSON, JOHN

78

HS 3074

Mapping the Ocean’s Stories

LITTLE-SIEBOLD, TODD

ES 1028

Marine Biology

PETERSEN, CHRISTOPHER

62

ES 5045

Marine Ecology

PETERSEN, CHRISTOPHER

80

ES 2030

Marine Mammal Biology I

TODD, SEAN

67

ES 3060

Marine Mammal Biology I: Field Studies

TODD, SEAN

71

ES 4089

Marine Mammals: In Sickness and in Health

BURGESS, TRISTAN

79

HS 2049

Marvelous Terrible Place: Human Ecology of Newfoundland

TODD, SEAN

93

HS 5013

Methods of Teaching Writing Across the Curriculum

CASS, BLAKE

123

HS 3027

Microeconomics for Business and Policy

TAYLOR, DAVIS

102

HS 2112

Midnight’s Children

TANEJA, PALAK

101

ES 3065

Molecular Genetics Workshop

PETERSEN, CHRISTOPHER

72

AD 1060

Movement Training Basics

BAKER, JODI

41

AD 4018

Movement Training Basics II

BAKER, JODI

51

MD 3014

Museum Practicum

COLBERT, DRU

132

AD 1067

Music Fundamentals: Intro to Reading/Hearing/Writing/Playing

REMY, MICHAEL

42

AD 6029 Musicianship

HENDERSON, JONATHAN

54

AD 3078

Native American Drama

MENDEZ, KHRISTIAN E

48

HS 3070

Native American Law

CLINE, KEN

107

HS 3059

Native American Literature

WALDRON, KAREN

106

HS 2096

Nature, Humans, and Philosophy

LAKEY, HEATHER

98

MD 1028

Needle as Sword: the Power of a Stitch

MOSER, NIKKI

129

ES 5043

Neotropical Herpetology

RESSEL, STEPHEN

80

HS 2011

Nineteenth Century American Women

WALDRON, KAREN

92

108

AD 4020 Object and Performance

BAKER, JODI; ANDREWS, NANCY

HS 3036

Oceans and Fishes: Readings in Environmental History

LITTLE-SIEBOLD, TODD

HS 3098

On Questions of Rights, Responsibility, and Reparations

VAN VLIET, NETTA

110

ES 3050

Organic Chemistry I

HUDSON, REUBEN

71

ES 5014

Organic Chemistry II

HUDSON, REUBEN

80

MD 3016

Origins: History, Genetics, and Memory

LITTLE-SIEBOLD, TODD; HESS, HELEN

132

ES 1016

Ornithology

SWANN, SCOTT

60

AD 2035

Our Band Could Be Your Life: Music, Art, Zines 1975-2015

MAHONEY, DANIEL

45

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

51
104

141

HS 3031

Our Public Lands: Past, Present, and Future

CLINE, KEN

103

AD 1057

Performance and Ecology: What Can Theater Do?

MENDEZ, KHRISTIAN E

40

HS 1065

Philosophies of Good and Evil

LAKEY, HEATHER

85

HS 4054 Philosophies of Love

COX, GRAY

117

HS 2074

Philosophy of Death and Dying

LAKEY, HEATHER

96

ES 1056

Physics and Mathematics of Sustainable Energy

FELDMAN, DAVID

63

ES 1018

Physics I: Mechanics and Energy

FELDMAN, DAVID

61

ES 2046

Physics II: Modern Physics

FELDMAN, DAVID

68

ES 2041

Physics II: Relativity

FELDMAN, DAVID

67

ES 1081

Plants and People: Economic Botany

LETCHER, SUSAN

64

ES 3093

Plants and the Urban Environment

LAWLOR, JOSIE

73

HS 3050

Poetry Workshop

MAHONEY, DANIEL

ES 1076

Polar Ecology and Exploration

TODD, SEAN

64

HS 3105

Policing in Communities of Color

WESSLER, STEPHEN L

112

HS 2086

Politics and the Supreme Court

SEDDIG, ROBERT

97

MD 5012

Politics, Body, Representation

BAKER, JODI; VAN VLIET, NETTA

ES 4050

Population and Community Ecology

LETCHER, SUSAN

77

HS 3061

Postcolonial Islands

VAN VLIET, NETTA

106

HS 2081

Postcolonialism and Psychoanalysis

VAN VLIET, NETTA

96

ES 3090

Practicum in Sustainable Energy

GIBSON, DAVID

73

MD 1027

Primitive Skills for the 21st Century

JENEI, NICHOLAS PAUL

129

HS 1062

Problems and Dilemmas in Bioethics

LAKEY, HEATHER

85

HS 1094

Public Speaking Workshop

RAND, KENDRA

89

HS 2111

Queer Literature

LEWIS, RHIANNON

101

HS 2092

Race and Racism in America: A Very Short History

LITTLE-SIEBOLD, TODD

98

HS 4042 Reading the West

ANDERSON, JOHN

115

HS 2050

Religious Intolerance in the United States

WESSLER, STEPHEN L

94

ES 3076

Restoration Ecology

LETCHER, SUSAN

72

HS 2109

Rethinking the Canon: Self, Others, and Philosophy

LAKEY, HEATHER

100

ES 2032

Rocks and Minerals

HALL, SARAH

67

AD 5023

Romanticism: The Triumph of the Imagination over Reason?

CLINGER, CATHERINE

52

AD 6030 Samba Percussion Ensemble

HENDERSON, JONATHAN

54

MD 1025

Science Visualization: Theory and Practice

ROCK, JENNIFER

129

ED 5019

Secondary Methods: Life Science, Social Studies and English

FULLER, LINDA

60

ES 4041

Seeds

MORSE, SUZANNE

76

142

105

134

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

HS 3087

Seminar in Human Ecology

BORDEN, RICHARD

110

HS 2072

Sex, Gender, Identity, and Power

LAKEY, HEATHER

95

HS 3029

Shakespeare: Character, Conflict, and Cinematography

TANEJA, PALAK

103

MD 3013

Sheep to Shawl

LETCHER, SUSAN

132

HS 4079

Skills for Conflict Resolution and Advocacy on Human Rights

WESSLER, STEPHEN L

119

HS 5049 Social Science Research Methods

COLLUM, KOURTNEY

126

HS 3062

Solutions

FRIEDLANDER, JAY

106

AD 3014

Soundscape

ANDREWS, NANCY; TODD, SEAN

AD 1061

Sourcing the Body: Experiential Anatomy

ROBBINS, DANI

41

HS 4097

Spanish Conversation I

PEÑA, KARLA

121

AD 3025

Special Topics in Production

BAKER, JODI

47

AD 5025

Strangers and Performance

BAKER, JODI

53

ED 5013

Student Teaching

FULLER, LINDA

60

AD 4019

Studio Printmaking

CLINGER, CATHERINE

51

ED 3012

Supporting Students with Disabilities in the Regular Classroom

SANBORN, KELLEY

57

HS 3035

Sustainable Strategies

FRIEDLANDER, JAY

104

HS 3086 Sustenance

FRIEDLANDER, JAY

110

ED 3106

Teaching Comprehensive Sexuality Education

MAGNUSON, MADALYNNE

58

HS 3103

Terrestrial Politics

STABINSKY, DOREEN

111

MD 3012

The Anthropocene

HALL, SARAH; VAN VLIET, NETTA

131

HS 3032

The Cold War: Early Years

MCKOWN, JAMIE

103

HS 3038

The Cold War: The Later Years

MCKOWN, JAMIE

104

AD 1063

The History of Making Prints

EARLEY, ANNIKA LOUISE

41

ES 3036

The History of Natural History

ANDERSON, JOHN

70

HS 4098 The Human Ecology of AI: Problems and Projects

COX, GRAY

121

HS 3102

The Human Ecology of Wilderness

CLINE, KEN

111

HS 3055

The Mayas of Yesterday and Today

PEÑA, KARLA

105

HS 4092

The Measure of Our Lives: Toni Morrison Seminar

WALDRON, KAREN

120

HS 5018

The Nature of Narrative

WALDRON, KAREN

124

HS 1086

The Poet’s Profession: An Introduction to Poetry

LEWIS, RHIANNON

88

HS 2106

The Power of Debt

STIVERS, ABBY J.

100

AD 4016

The Wilderness in Landscape Art I: Proto-Ecological Visions

CLINGER, CATHERINE

50

HS 1092

This Place Called India

TANEJA, PALAK

88

ES 4061

Topics in Scientific Research: Geoscience and Geochemistry

HALL, SARAH

78

HS 2087

Transforming Food Systems

COLLUM, KOURTNEY

98

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

46

143

ES 2014

Trees and Shrubs of Mount Desert Island

WEBER, JILL

66

HS 4101

Troubadours, Nuns, Concubines, and Witches before 1500

TUROK, KATHARINE

123

ES 5044

Tutorial: Advanced Ornithology

ANDERSON, JOHN

80

ED 4014

Tutorial: Contemplative Science, Practice, and Education

TAI, BONNIE

59

HS 4096 Tutorial: Creative Writing

CASS, BLAKE

121

ES 5038

Tutorial: Ecology and Evolution of Parasites

HESS, HELEN

80

HS 3076

US Farm and Food Policy

COLLUM, KOURTNEY

ED 3010

Understanding and Managing Group Dynamics

TAI, BONNIE

AD 1051

Walking the Line: Introductory Drawing		39

HS 4047

Waste

VAN VLIET, NETTA

116

ES 3085

Watersheds

HALL, SARAH

72

HS 4043 Wilderness in the West: Promise and Problems

CLINE, KEN

116

ES 4036

Wildlife Ecology

ANDERSON, JOHN

75

HS 5012

Wildlife Law Seminar

CLINE, KEN

ES 4012

Winter Ecology

RESSEL, STEPHEN

74

HS 3100

Within Living Memory: Audio Production and Podcasting

KOCH, GALEN

111

MD 1022

Working the Sea

ANDERSON, JOHN

AD 1045

World Percussion

BENNETT, MICHAEL

38

HS 2103

Writing for Nonprofits

LEWIS, RHIANNON

99

HS 1039

Writing Seminar I: Exposition

STAFF

83

HS 2055

Writing Seminar II: Argumentation

STAFF

94

HS 4085 Writing Your Novella

CASS, BLAKE

119

ED 1017

Young Adult Literature

RYAN, SIOBHAN

56

MD 1030

Zoological Field Sketching

GRAHAM, CARRIE

144

108
57

123

128

130

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

INDEX BY COURSE NUMBER
NUMBER TITLE

FACULTY

PAGE

ARTS AND DESIGN
AD 1019

Four-Dimensional Studio

ANDREWS, NANCY

37

AD 1026

Introduction to Photography

WINER, JOSHUA

37

AD 1032

Introduction to Contemporary Dance and Composition

ROBBINS, DANI

37

AD 1036

Figure Drawing

HILBERT, FRANCE

37

AD 1038

History of Video Art

CAPERS, COLIN

38

AD 1039

Ceramics I

MANN, ROCKY

38

AD 1044

Audio Production and Engineering

SOARES, ZACHARY

38

AD 1045

World Percussion

BENNETT, MICHAEL

38

AD 1051

Walking the Line: Introductory Drawing		39

AD 1052

Cinematic Visions from Marginalized Peoples

CAPERS, COLIN

39

AD 1055

Kinetic Sculpture Introduction

TARDIE, HANNAH

39

AD 1056

Beginning Contemporary Dance Technique

ROBBINS, DANI

39

AD 1057

Performance and Ecology: What Can Theater Do?

MENDEZ, KHRISTIAN E

40

AD 1058

Dissecting Popular Music

HENDERSON, JONATHAN

40

AD 1059

Fundamentals of Sculpting: Sculpting the Head

HILBERT, FRANCE

40

AD 1060

Movement Training Basics

BAKER, JODI

41

AD 1061

Sourcing the Body: Experiential Anatomy

ROBBINS, DANI

41

AD 1062

Architecture in the Expanded Field

LOCK, TIMOTHY

41

AD 1063

The History of Making Prints

EARLEY, ANNIKA LOUISE

41

AD 1065

Contemporary Dance Composition

ROBBINS, DANI

42

AD 1066

Introduction to Painting

BEACH, DESMOND

42

AD 1067

Music Fundamentals: Intro to Reading/Hearing/Writing/Playing

REMY, MICHAEL

42

AD 2011

Graphic Design Studio I: Visual Communication

COLBERT, DRU

42

AD 2012

3D Studio: Introduction to Three-Dimensional Art and Design

COLBERT, DRU

43

AD 2013

Constructing Visual Narrative

COLBERT, DRU

43

AD 2014

Curiosity and Wonder: Design and Interpretation in the Museum

COLBERT, DRU

43

AD 2017

Drawing Mineral and Botanical Matter in the Forest of Maine

CLINGER, CATHERINE

44

AD 2020

History of Photography

WINER, JOSHUA

44

AD 2022

Film Theory

CAPERS, COLIN

44

AD 2029

Contemporary Artist as Researcher and Activist

CLINGER, CATHERINE

45

AD 2035

Our Band Could Be Your Life: Music, Art, Zines 1975-2015

MAHONEY, DANIEL

45

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

145

AD 2036

Critical Making and New Media Art

KARRIEM, QURAN

45

AD 3012

Documentary Video Studio

ANDREWS, NANCY

45

AD 3013

Animation

ANDREWS, NANCY

46

AD 3014

Soundscape

ANDREWS, NANCY; TODD, SEAN

46

AD 3015

Art of the Puppet

ANDREWS, NANCY

46

AD 3017

Dramatic Writing for Stage and Screen

LEPICO, ANDREA

46

AD 3018

History of Filmmaking II (1946-Present)

CAPERS, COLIN

47

AD 3020

American Dreaming: Theatre and Activism in the US

BAKER, JODI

47

AD 3025

Special Topics in Production

BAKER, JODI

47

AD 3032

Intermediate Ceramics

MANN, ROCKY

48

AD 3077

Black Atlantic Music

HENDERSON, JONATHAN

48

AD 3078

Native American Drama

MENDEZ, KHRISTIAN E

48

AD 3079

Jazz Manouche

HENDERSON, JONATHAN

49

AD 3080 Intermediate Projects in Photography

WINER, JOSHUA

49

AD 3081

Craft Ecologies: Mount Desert Island

DOWNING, E. SAFFRONIA

49

AD 4013

Activating Spaces: Installation Art

COLBERT, DRU

50

AD 4014

Graphic Design Studio II: Digital Projects

COLBERT, DRU

50

AD 4016

The Wilderness in Landscape Art I: Proto-Ecological Visions

CLINGER, CATHERINE

50

AD 4018

Movement Training Basics II

BAKER, JODI

51

AD 4019

Studio Printmaking

CLINGER, CATHERINE

51

AD 4020 Object and Performance

BAKER, JODI; ANDREWS, NANCY

51

AD 4034 Actor Training II

BAKER, JODI

51

AD 4035 Improvisation in Music

BLOTNICK, RYAN

52

AD 5014

Graphic Attack: Advanced Graphic Design Studio II

MENDEZ, KHRISTIAN E

52

AD 5017

Animation II

ANDREWS, NANCY

52

AD 5023

Romanticism: The Triumph of the Imagination over Reason?

CLINGER, CATHERINE

52

AD 5025

Strangers and Performance

BAKER, JODI

53

AD 5032

Advanced Studio Printmaking

CLINGER, CATHERINE

53

AD 5033

Making Art: Effort, Resilience, Persistence

ANDREWS, NANCY

53

AD 6029 Musicianship

HENDERSON, JONATHAN

54

AD 6030 Samba Percussion Ensemble

HENDERSON, JONATHAN

54

EDUCATIONAL STUDIES
ED 1010

Experiential Education

TAI, BONNIE

54

ED 1011

Children’s Literature

SWEENEY, MERYL

54

ED 1013

Changing Schools, Changing Society

TAI, BONNIE

55

146

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

ED 1014

Child Development

ALEX, JOANNE

55

ED 1015

Educational Innovation

FULLER, LINDA

55

ED 1016

Introduction to Adolescent Psychology

HILL, KENNETH

56

ED 1017

Young Adult Literature

RYAN, SIOBHAN

56

ED 1019

Advocacy and Education for English Learners

CHIEN, MING-TSO

56

ED 1022

Learning in the Arts through Exploration

SHUTT, CAROL

56

ED 2010

Disability Rights in Education

RABASCA, ADAM

57

ED 2011

Equity and Social Justice in Education

CHIEN, MING-TSO

57

ED 3010

Understanding and Managing Group Dynamics

TAI, BONNIE

57

ED 3012

Supporting Students with Disabilities in the Regular Classroom

SANBORN, KELLEY

57

ED 3106

Teaching Comprehensive Sexuality Education

MAGNUSON, MADALYNNE

58

ED 4012

Integrated Methods IA: Grades K-4 Reading and Writing

CURRAN SARGENT, LYNN

58

ED 4013

Integrated Methods IB: Grades 5-8 Reading and Writing

FULLER, LINDA

58

ED 4014

Tutorial: Contemplative Science, Practice, and Education

TAI, BONNIE

59

ED 5010

Curriculum Design and Assessment

TAI, BONNIE

59

ED 5011

Integrated Methods II: Science, Math, and Social Studies

FULLER, LINDA

59

ED 5013

Student Teaching

FULLER, LINDA

60

ED 5019

Secondary Methods: Life Science, Social Studies and English

FULLER, LINDA

60

ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCES
ES 1014

Gardens and Greenhouses:Theory/Practice of Organic Gardening

MORSE, SUZANNE

60

ES 1016

Ornithology

SWANN, SCOTT

60

ES 1018

Physics I: Mechanics and Energy

FELDMAN, DAVID

61

ES 1022

Introduction to Oceanography

TODD, SEAN

61

ES 1024

Calculus I

FELDMAN, DAVID

61

ES 1026

Introduction to Chaos and Fractals

FELDMAN, DAVID

61

ES 1028

Marine Biology

PETERSEN, CHRISTOPHER

62

ES 1030

Chemistry II

HUDSON, REUBEN

62

ES 1038

Geology of Mount Desert Island

HALL, SARAH

62

ES 1042

Geology and Humanity

HALL, SARAH

62

ES 1052

Biology: Cellular Processes of Life

STAFF

62

ES 1054

Biology: Form and Function

STAFF

63

ES 1056

Physics and Mathematics of Sustainable Energy

FELDMAN, DAVID

63

ES 1066

Chemistry I

HUDSON, REUBEN

63

ES 1072

Chemistry and Biology of Food and Drink

HUDSON, REUBEN

63

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

147

ES 1075

Geology of National Parks

HALL, SARAH

64

ES 1076

Polar Ecology and Exploration

TODD, SEAN

64

ES 1081

Plants and People: Economic Botany

LETCHER, SUSAN

64

ES 1082

Climate and Seasons: Maple Production

HUDSON, REUBEN

65

ES 1083

Lichen Biology

OLDAY, FRED

65

ES 1085

Data Science I: Visualization

BAKER, LAURIE

65

ES 1086

Introduction to Field Sampling: Collection to Data Points

HUDSON, REUBEN

65

ES 2010

Ecology: Natural History

SWANN, SCOTT

66

ES 2012

Introduction to Statistics and Research Design

TODD, SEAN

66

ES 2014

Trees and Shrubs of Mount Desert Island

WEBER, JILL

66

ES 2020

Art and Science of Fermented Foods

MORSE, SUZANNE

66

ES 2030

Marine Mammal Biology I

TODD, SEAN

67

ES 2032

Rocks and Minerals

HALL, SARAH

67

ES 2037

Introductory Entomology

GRAHAM, CARRIE

67

ES 2041

Physics II: Relativity

FELDMAN, DAVID

67

ES 2044

College Seminar: Ecology: Natural History

RESSEL, STEPHEN

68

ES 2045

Applied Data Science

SHANK, KYLE S

68

ES 2046

Physics II: Modern Physics

FELDMAN, DAVID

68

ES 3010

Agroecology

MORSE, SUZANNE

69

ES 3012

Calculus II

FELDMAN, DAVID

69

ES 3014

Ecology

ANDERSON, JOHN

69

ES 3018

Herpetology

RESSEL, STEPHEN

69

ES 3020

Invertebrate Zoology

HESS, HELEN

70

ES 3028

Calculus III: Multivariable Calculus

FELDMAN, DAVID

70

ES 3032

Genetics

HESS, HELEN

70

ES 3036

The History of Natural History

ANDERSON, JOHN

70

ES 3037

Bryophyte Biology: Mosses and their Allies

OLDAY, FRED

71

ES 3044

Climate and Weather

HALL, SARAH

71

ES 3050

Organic Chemistry I

HUDSON, REUBEN

71

ES 3060

Marine Mammal Biology I: Field Studies

TODD, SEAN

71

ES 3061

Functional Plant Morphology

MORSE, SUZANNE

71

ES 3065

Molecular Genetics Workshop

PETERSEN, CHRISTOPHER

72

ES 3076

Restoration Ecology

LETCHER, SUSAN

72

ES 3083

Linear Algebra with Applications to Differential Equations

FELDMAN, DAVID

72

ES 3085

Watersheds

HALL, SARAH

72

148

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

ES 3088

Introduction to Neurobiology

HAYNES, NICHOLAS

73

ES 3090

Practicum in Sustainable Energy

GIBSON, DAVID

73

ES 3093

Plants and the Urban Environment

LAWLOR, JOSIE

73

ES 3094

Dynamic Landscapes

HALL, SARAH

73

ES 4010

Biomechanics

HESS, HELEN

74

ES 4012

Winter Ecology

RESSEL, STEPHEN

74

ES 4016

Island Life

ANDERSON, JOHN

74

ES 4018

Human Anatomy and Physiology I

ANDERSON, JOHN

75

ES 4026

Cross Kingdom Interactions

MORSE, SUZANNE

75

ES 4036

Wildlife Ecology

ANDERSON, JOHN

75

ES 4038

Ecology and Natural History of the American West

ANDERSON, JOHN

75

ES 4040 Animal Behavior

ANDERSON, JOHN

76

ES 4041

MORSE, SUZANNE

76

ES 4048 Biostatistics

LETCHER, SUSAN

76

ES 4049

Biochemistry

HUDSON, REUBEN

77

ES 4050

Population and Community Ecology

LETCHER, SUSAN

77

ES 4053

Ecosystem Ecology

LETCHER, SUSAN

77

ES 4059

Advanced Topics in Marine Mammal Biology

TODD, SEAN

77

ES 4060

Mammalogy

ANDERSON, JOHN

78

ES 4061

Topics in Scientific Research: Geoscience and Geochemistry

HALL, SARAH

78

ES 4062

Applied Data Science II

SHANK, KYLE S

78

ES 4063

Analytical Chemistry

HUDSON, REUBEN

79

ES 4089

Marine Mammals: In Sickness and in Health

BURGESS, TRISTAN

79

ES 5012

Conservation Biology

ANDERSON, JOHN

79

ES 5014

Organic Chemistry II

HUDSON, REUBEN

80

ES 5038

Tutorial: Ecology and Evolution of Parasites

HESS, HELEN

80

ES 5043

Neotropical Herpetology

RESSEL, STEPHEN

80

ES 5044

Tutorial: Advanced Ornithology

ANDERSON, JOHN

80

ES 5045

Marine Ecology

PETERSEN, CHRISTOPHER

80

Seeds

HUMAN ECOLOGY
HE 1010

Human Ecology Core Course

STAFF

81

HS 0958 Introduction to Academic Writing

CASS, BLAKE

81

HS 1011

LITTLE-SIEBOLD, TODD

81

HUMAN STUDIES
Environmental History

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

149

HS 1012

Introduction to the Legal Process

CLINE, KEN

81

HS 1013

From Native Empires to Nation States

LITTLE-SIEBOLD, TODD

81

HS 1014

Feminist Theory in a Transnational Frame I

VAN VLIET, NETTA

82

HS 1019

Beginning Spanish I

PEÑA, KARLA

82

HS 1020

Beginning Spanish II

PEÑA, KARLA

82

HS 1021

History of the American Conservation Movement

CLINE, KEN

82

HS 1025

Business and Non-Profit Basics

FRIEDLANDER, JAY

83

HS 1032

Acadia: Exploring the National Park Idea

CLINE, KEN

83

HS 1039

Writing Seminar I: Exposition

STAFF

83

HS 1042

Globalization/Anti-Globalization

VAN VLIET, NETTA

83

HS 1046

Introduction to Economics and the Economy

TAYLOR, DAVIS

83

HS 1052

Ethnographic Methods

VAN VLIET, NETTA

84

HS 1053

Intimate Partner Violence: Dynamics and Community Response

GAGNON DA SILVA, PAMELA 84

HS 1054

Climate Justice

STABINSKY, DOREEN

84

HS 1062

Problems and Dilemmas in Bioethics

LAKEY, HEATHER

85

HS 1064

College Seminar: Practical Skills in Community Development

BEARD, RONALD

85

HS 1065

Philosophies of Good and Evil

LAKEY, HEATHER

85

HS 1073

Beginning Spanish I with Vocabulary

PEÑA, KARLA

86

HS 1075

Animals and Ethics

LAKEY, HEATHER

86

HS 1076

College Seminar: Truth

COX, GRAY

86

HS 1077

Ethnographic Writing

VAN VLIET, NETTA

87

HS 1084

College Seminar: Utopia/Dystopia

LAKEY, HEATHER

87

HS 1085

Introduction to Sexual Health

MAGNUSON, MADALYNNE

87

HS 1086

The Poet’s Profession: An Introduction to Poetry

LEWIS, RHIANNON

88

HS 1091

Introduction to Feminist Therapy: Practices and Principles

GAGNON DA SILVA, PAMELA 88

HS 1092

This Place Called India

TANEJA, PALAK

88

HS 1094

Public Speaking Workshop

RAND, KENDRA

89

HS 1095

Introduction to Postcolonialism

TANEJA, PALAK

89

HS 1096

Introduction to Art Therapy

CHERMAK, HILARY

89

HS 1097

Buddhist Philosophies

LAKEY, HEATHER

90

HS 1098

Intercultural Communication

CHIEN, MING-TSO

90

HS 1099

Introduction to Natural Resources Management

MALTZ, ERICA

90

HS 1100

College Seminar: Writing the Environment

CAPEN, JOHN

91

HS 1101

American Exceptionalism: Land of Liberty, Built on Slavery

BLAINE, JAMES

91

HS 1102

Equal Rights, Equal Voices: Articulating Suffrage

MCKOWN, JAMIE

91

150

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

HS 2010

Literature, Science, and Spirituality

WALDRON, KAREN

92

HS 2011

Nineteenth Century American Women

WALDRON, KAREN

92

HS 2020

Geographic Information Systems I: Foundations and Applications

LONGSWORTH, GORDON

92

HS 2021

Immersion Practica in Spanish and Yucatecan Culture

PEÑA, KARLA

93

HS 2038

Gender, Politics, and Nature in Folk/Fairy Tales of the World

TUROK, KATHARINE

93

HS 2049

Marvelous Terrible Place: Human Ecology of Newfoundland

TODD, SEAN

93

HS 2050

Religious Intolerance in the United States

WESSLER, STEPHEN L

94

HS 2055

Writing Seminar II: Argumentation

STAFF

94

HS 2056

Constitutional Law: Civil Rights and Liberties

SEDDIG, ROBERT

94

HS 2057

Fail Better: Writing Short Fiction

MAHONEY, DANIEL

94

HS 2061

Indigenous America

LITTLE-SIEBOLD, TODD

95

HS 2063

Hate Crimes in the Contemporary US and Europe

WESSLER, STEPHEN L

95

HS 2071

Little Magazines: Seminar in Contemporary Literary Publishing

MAHONEY, DANIEL

95

HS 2072

Sex, Gender, Identity, and Power

LAKEY, HEATHER

95

HS 2074

Philosophy of Death and Dying

LAKEY, HEATHER

96

HS 2076

Life Stories: Memory, Family, and Place

DONOVAN, MARTHA

96

HS 2078

College Seminar: City/Country in US Literature 1860-1920

WALDRON, KAREN

96

HS 2081

Postcolonialism and Psychoanalysis

VAN VLIET, NETTA

96

HS 2083

Introduction to Journalism: Telling the Story

LEVIN, ROBERT

97

HS 2084 European Political Institutions

STABINSKY, DOREEN

97

HS 2086

Politics and the Supreme Court

SEDDIG, ROBERT

97

HS 2087

Transforming Food Systems

COLLUM, KOURTNEY

98

HS 2092

Race and Racism in America: A Very Short History

LITTLE-SIEBOLD, TODD

98

HS 2096

Nature, Humans, and Philosophy

LAKEY, HEATHER

98

HS 2097

Fiction Writing: Crafting Believable Characters

CASS, BLAKE

99

HS 2098

Introduction to Philosophy of Mind

JACOBY, FRANKLIN R

99

HS 2103

Writing for Nonprofits

LEWIS, RHIANNON

99

HS 2106

The Power of Debt

STIVERS, ABBY J.

100

HS 2107

Indigenous Peoples, Climate Change, and Power

LITTLE-SIEBOLD, TODD

100

HS 2109

Rethinking the Canon: Self, Others, and Philosophy

LAKEY, HEATHER

100

HS 2110

College Seminar: Barbed Wires, Drawn Lines

TANEJA, PALAK

101

HS 2111

Queer Literature

LEWIS, RHIANNON

101

HS 2112

Midnight’s Children

TANEJA, PALAK

101

HS 2113

Latin American Literature: Pablo Neruda—Residencia En La Tie

MAHONEY, DANIEL

102

HS 3015

African American Literature

WALDRON, KAREN

102

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

151

HS 3022

Intermediate Spanish II

PEÑA, KARLA

102

HS 3023

International Wildlife Policy and Protected Areas

CLINE, KEN

102

HS 3027

Microeconomics for Business and Policy

TAYLOR, DAVIS

102

HS 3029

Shakespeare: Character, Conflict, and Cinematography

TANEJA, PALAK

103

HS 3031

Our Public Lands: Past, Present, and Future

CLINE, KEN

103

HS 3032

The Cold War: Early Years

MCKOWN, JAMIE

103

HS 3035

Sustainable Strategies

FRIEDLANDER, JAY

104

HS 3036

Oceans and Fishes: Readings in Environmental History

LITTLE-SIEBOLD, TODD

104

HS 3038

The Cold War: The Later Years

MCKOWN, JAMIE

104

HS 3039

Communicating Science

ROCK, JENNIFER

105

HS 3040 History of Agriculture: Apples

LITTLE-SIEBOLD, TODD

105

HS 3050

Poetry Workshop

MAHONEY, DANIEL

105

HS 3055

The Mayas of Yesterday and Today

PEÑA, KARLA

105

HS 3059

Native American Literature

WALDRON, KAREN

106

HS 3061

Postcolonial Islands

VAN VLIET, NETTA

106

HS 3062

Solutions

FRIEDLANDER, JAY

106

HS 3068 Linguistics, Language, and Culture: Human Ecological Approach

COX, GRAY

106

HS 3069

Genocide, Resistance, Response, and Reconciliation

WESSLER, STEPHEN L

107

HS 3070

Native American Law

CLINE, KEN

107

HS 3073

Bees and Society

COLLUM, KOURTNEY

107

HS 3074

Mapping the Ocean’s Stories

LITTLE-SIEBOLD, TODD

108

HS 3076

US Farm and Food Policy

COLLUM, KOURTNEY

108

HS 3079

College Seminar: The Anthropology of Food

COLLUM, KOURTNEY

109

HS 3083

Feminist Theory in a Transnational Frame II

VAN VLIET, NETTA

109

HS 3085

College Seminar: Nutritional Anthropology

COLLUM, KOURTNEY

109

HS 3086 Sustenance

FRIEDLANDER, JAY

110

HS 3087

Seminar in Human Ecology

BORDEN, RICHARD

110

HS 3098

On Questions of Rights, Responsibility, and Reparations

VAN VLIET, NETTA

110

HS 3099

A History of God: Mysticism, Metaphysics, Politics, and Nature

COX, GRAY

111

HS 3100

Within Living Memory: Audio Production and Podcasting

KOCH, GALEN

111

HS 3102

The Human Ecology of Wilderness

CLINE, KEN

111

HS 3103

Terrestrial Politics

STABINSKY, DOREEN

111

HS 3104

Are you down with the cause?: Student Activism in Higher Ed

BLANSETT, RACHEL

112

HS 3105

Policing in Communities of Color

WESSLER, STEPHEN L

112

HS 3106

Blue Food Systems

SMITH, HILLARY

112

152

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

HS 3107

Community-based Climate Solutions Lab

CLINE, KEN

113

HS 3108

Creative Nonfiction Workshop: Personal into the Cultural

GREENBERG, ARIELLE

113

HS 3109

Food and War Part I

COLLUM, KOURTNEY

114

HS 4012

Contemporary Women’s Novels

WALDRON, KAREN

114

HS 4020 Environmentality: Power, Knowledge, and Ecology

MCKOWN, JAMIE

114

HS 4022

Launching a New Venture

FRIEDLANDER, JAY

115

HS 4026

Environmental Law and Policy

CLINE, KEN

115

HS 4028

Cross-Cultural American Women’s Novels

WALDRON, KAREN

115

HS 4042 Reading the West

ANDERSON, JOHN

115

HS 4043 Wilderness in the West: Promise and Problems

CLINE, KEN

116

HS 4047

Waste

VAN VLIET, NETTA

116

HS 4052

Economic Development: Theory and Case Studies

TAYLOR, DAVIS

117

HS 4053

Economics of Cooperation, Networks, and Trust

TAYLOR, DAVIS

117

HS 4054 Philosophies of Love

COX, GRAY

117

HS 4056 Histories of Race

LITTLE-SIEBOLD, TODD

118

HS 4067

TAYLOR, DAVIS

118

HS 4069 Leaving Capitalism

TAYLOR, DAVIS

118

HS 4079

WESSLER, STEPHEN L

119

HS 4085 Writing Your Novella

CASS, BLAKE

119

HS 4086 Derrida and Questions of Difference

VAN VLIET, NETTA

119

HS 4087 History Workshop: Wabanaki Studies

LITTLE-SIEBOLD, TODD

120

HS 4088 Literature of Exile

TUROK, KATHARINE

120

HS 4092

WALDRON, KAREN

120

Ecological Economics

Skills for Conflict Resolution and Advocacy on Human Rights

The Measure of Our Lives: Toni Morrison Seminar

HS 4096 Tutorial: Creative Writing

CASS, BLAKE

121

HS 4097

PEÑA, KARLA

121

HS 4098 The Human Ecology of AI: Problems and Projects

COX, GRAY

121

HS 4099 Contemporary Black Writers

WALDRON, KAREN

122

HS 4100

Carbon

STABINSKY, DOREEN

122

HS 4101

Troubadours, Nuns, Concubines, and Witches before 1500

TUROK, KATHARINE

123

HS 5010

Advanced Composition

KOZAK, ANNE

123

HS 5012

Wildlife Law Seminar

CLINE, KEN

123

HS 5013

Methods of Teaching Writing Across the Curriculum

CASS, BLAKE

123

HS 5014

Austen, Bronte, Eliot

WALDRON, KAREN

123

HS 5015

Hydro Politics in a Thirsty World

CLINE, KEN

124

HS 5017

Advanced Spanish I

PEÑA, KARLA

124

Spanish Conversation I

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

153

HS 5018

The Nature of Narrative

WALDRON, KAREN

124

HS 5020

Advanced International Environmental Law Seminar

CLINE, KEN

124

HS 5022

Hatchery

FRIEDLANDER, JAY

125

HS 5039

Equal Rights, Equal Voices: The Rhetoric of Woman Suffrage

MCKOWN, JAMIE

125

HS 5044 Diaspora and Unbelonging

VAN VLIET, NETTA

126

HS 5049 Social Science Research Methods

COLLUM, KOURTNEY

126

HS 5051

TAYLOR, DAVIS

126

HS 5060 Food and War Part II

COLLUM, KOURTNEY

127

HS 5062

Corn and Coffee

LITTLE-SIEBOLD, TODD

127

HS 6012

Learning a Language on Your Own

COX, GRAY

128

HS 6013

Immersion Program in French Language, Art, and Culture

STABINSKY, DOREEN

128

Capitalism: Economics and Institutions

MULTIDISCIPLINARY
MD 1015

Farm Animal Management

COLLUM, KOURTNEY

128

MD 1022

Working the Sea

ANDERSON, JOHN

128

MD 1025

Science Visualization: Theory and Practice

ROCK, JENNIFER

129

MD 1027

Primitive Skills for the 21st Century

JENEI, NICHOLAS PAUL

129

MD 1028

Needle as Sword: the Power of a Stitch

MOSER, NIKKI

129

MD 1029

Brewing and Business

STEIN, JON

130

MD 1030

Zoological Field Sketching

GRAHAM, CARRIE

130

MD 2011

Fisheries, Fishermen, and Fishing Communities

PETERSEN, CHRISTOPHER 130

MD 2012

Failure

BAKER, JODI

131

MD 3010

Biology Through the Lens

RESSEL, STEPHEN

131

MD 3012

The Anthropocene

HALL, SARAH; VAN VLIET, NETTA

131

MD 3013

Sheep to Shawl

LETCHER, SUSAN

132

MD 3014

Museum Practicum

COLBERT, DRU

132

MD 3015

Green Building Through the Lens of LEED

GIBSON, DAVID

132

MD 3016

Origins: History, Genetics, and Memory

LITTLE-SIEBOLD, TODD; HESS, HELEN

132

MD 4013

Demons from the Depths

ANDERSON, JOHN

133

MD 4014

Building Science and Energy Auditing

GIBSON, DAVID

133

MD 5012

Politics, Body, Representation

BAKER, JODI; VAN VLIET, NETTA

134

154

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC COURSE CATALOG 2022–2023

DATES AND DEADLINES FOR 2022–2023
TERMS

FALL 2022

WINTER 2023 SPRING 2023

FALL 2023

DATES
First day of class

9/12/22

1/9/23

4/3/23

9/11/23

Last day of class

11/18/22

3/17/23

6/9/23

11/17/23

Commencement

6/10/23

BUSINESS OFFICE
Online statements available

7/15/22

11/4/22

2/28/23

7/8/23

Payment due dates

8/12/22

12/5/22

3/24/23

8/10/23

Course withdrawal (no reversals)

10/14/22

2/10/23

5/5/23

10/13/23

10/16/22–
10/21/22

2/12/23–
2/17/23

5/7/23–
5/12/23

REGISTRAR
Registration
Add/drop

9/16/22

1/13/23

4/7/23

9/15/23

Independent study proposals

9/16/22

1/13/23

4/7/23

9/15/23

Residency applications due

10/21/22

2/17/23

5/12/23

Advising forum

10/12/22

2/8/23

Student self-evaluations

12/2/22

3/31/23

6/23/23

12/1/23

Faculty grades & evaluations

12/9/22

4/7/23

6/30/23

12/8/23

9/8/22

12/16/22

3/13/23
(summer
6/5/23)

9/8/23

9/30/22 for
winter term

1/27/23 for
spring term

4/21/23 for
fall term

INTERNSHIP COMMITTEE
Proposals

ACADEMIC AFFAIRS COMMITTEE
Group study proposals
SENIORS
Watson Fellowship first draft
Human ecology essay draft

8/22/23
10/21/22

Final signed human ecology essay
Senior project proposal

2/24/23
9/16/22

10/21/22

Senior project, completed

2/17/23

5/12/23

6/2/23

2023 to graduate or stand
Completed: internships, degree certification
form, community service, incompletes,
standing contract, transfer credit,
extensions, writing portfolio

4/28/23

SUMMER 2023 BUSINESS OFFICE (2023–2024 Academic Year)
Bills available online
Bills due

6/9/23
7/10/23

COLLEGE OF THE ATLANTIC
105 Eden Street · Bar Harbor ME 04609
800-528-0025 · inquiry@coa.edu
coa.edu

